
33.   Essay   1903/4

Aesthetics

                       I. PARIS NOTEBOOK

  Desire is the feeling which urges us to go to something and
loathing is the feeling which urges us to go from something: and
that art is improper which aims at exciting these feelings in us
whether by comedy or by tragedy. Of comedy later. But tragedy
aims at exciting in us feelings of pity and terror. Now terror is
the feeling which arrests us before whatever is grave in human
fortunes and unites us with its secret cause and pity is the
feeling which arrests us before whatever is grave in human
fortunes and unites us with the human sufferer. Now loathing,
which in an improper art aims at exciting in the way of tragedy,
differs, it will be seen, from the feelings which are proper to
tragic art, namely terror and pity. For loathing urges us from
rest because it urges us to go from something, but terror and
pity hold us in rest, as it were, by fascination. When tragic art
makes my body to shrink terror is not my feeling because I am
urged from rest, and moreover this art does not show me what is
grave, I mean what is constant and irremediable in human fortunes
nor does it unite me with any secret cause for it shows me only
what is unusual and remediable and it unites me with a cause only
too manifest. Nor is an art properly tragic which would move me
to prevent human suffering any more than an art is properly
tragic which would move me in anger against some manifest cause
of human suffering. Terror and pity, finally, are aspects of
sorrow comprehended in sorrow -- the feeling which the privation
of some good excites in us.
  And now of comedy. An improper art aims at exciting in the way
of comedy the feeling of desire but the feeling which is proper
to comic art is the feeling of joy. Desire, as I have said, is
the feeling which urges us to go to something but joy is the
feeling which the possession of some good excites in us. Desire,
the feeling which an improper art seeks to excite in the way of
comedy, differs, it will be seen, from joy. For desire urges us
from rest that we may possess something but joy holds us in rest
so long as we possess something. Desire, therefore, can only be
excited in us by a comedy (a work of comic art) which is not
sufficient in itself inasmuch as it urges us to seek something
beyond itself; but a comedy (a work of comic art) which does not
urge us to seek anything beyond itself excites in us the feeling
of joy. All art which excites in us the feeling of joy is so far
comic and according as this feeling of joy is excited by whatever
is substantial or accidental in human fortunes the art is to be
judged more or less excellent: and even tragic art may be said to
participate in the nature of comic art so far as the possession
of a work of tragic art (a tragedy) excites in us the feeling of
joy. From this it may be seen that tragedy is the imperfect
manner and comedy the perfect manner in art. All art, again, is
static for the feelings of terror and pity on the one hand and of
joy on the other hand are feelings which arrest US. It will be
seen afterwards how this rest is necessary for the apprehension
of the beautiful -- the end of all art, tragic or comic -- for
this rest is the only condition under which the images, which are
to excite in us terror or pity or joy, can be properly presented
to us and properly seen by us. For beauty is a quality of
something seen but terror and pity and joy are states of mind.
                          JAMES A. JOYCE, 13 Feb., 1903.

  . . . There are three conditions of art: the lyrical, the
epical and the dramatic. That art is lyrical whereby the artist
sets forth the image in immediate relation to himself; that art
is epical whereby the artist sets forth the image in mediate
relation to himself and to others; that art is dramatic whereby
the artist sets forth the image in immediate relation to others
....
                           JAMES A. JOYCE, 6 March, 1903, Paris .

  Rhythm seems to be the first or formal relation of part to part
in any whole or of a whole to its part or parts, or of any part
to the whole of which it is a part .... Parts constitute a whole
as far as they have a common end.
                           JAMES A. JOYCE. 25 March. 1903, Paris.

  e tekhne mimeitai ten physin -- This phrase is falsely rendered
as 'Art is an imitation of Nature'. Aristotle does not here
define art; he says only, 'Art imitates Nature' and means that
the artistic process is like the natural process.... It is false
to say that sculpture, for instance, is an art of repose if by
that be meant that sculpture is unassociated with movement.
Sculpture is associated with movement in as much as it is
rhythmic; for a work of sculptural art must be surveyed according
to its rhythm and this surveying is an imaginary movement in
space. It is not false to say that sculpture is an art of repose
in that a work of sculptural art cannot be presented as itself
moving in space and remain a work of sculptural art.
                           JAMES A. JOYCE, 27 March, 1903, Paris.

  Art is the human disposition of sensible or intelligible matter
for an aesthetic end.
                            JAMES A. JOYCE, 28 March, 1903,Paris.

Question: Why are not excrements, children, and lice works of
art?
Answer: Excrements, children, and lice are human products --
human dispositions of sensible matter. The process by which they
are produced is natural and non-artistic; their end is not an
aesthetic end: therefore they are not works of art.

Question: Can a photograph be a work of art?
Answer: A photograph is a disposition of sensible matter and may
be so disposed for an aesthetic end but it is not a human
disposition of sensible matter. Therefore it is not a work of
art.

Question: If a man hacking in fury at a block of wood make there
an image of a cow (say) has he made a work of art?
Answer: The image of a cow made by a man hacking in fury at a
block of wood is a human disposition of sensible matter but it is
not a human disposition of sensible matter for an aesthetic end.
Therefore it is not a work of art.

Question: Are houses, clothes, furniture, etc., works of art?
Answer: Houses, clothes, furniture, etc., are not necessarily
works of art. They are human dispositions of sensible matter.
When they are so disposed for an aesthetic end they are works of
art.


                         II. POLA NOTEBOOK

  Bonum est in quod tendit appetitus. S. Thomas Aquinas.

  The good is that towards the possession of which an appetite
tends: the good is the desirable. The true and the beautiful are
the most persistent orders of the desirable. Truth is desired by
the intellectual appetite which is appeased by the most
satisfying relations of the intelligible; beauty is desired by
the aesthetic appetite which is appeased by the most satisfying
relations of the sensible. The true and the beautiful are
spiritually possessed; the true by intellection, the beautiful by
apprehension, and the appetites which desire to possess them, the
intellectual and aesthetic appetites, are therefore spiritual
appetites ....
                                J. A. J. Pola, 7 XI 04.

  Pulchra sunt quae visa placent. S. Thomas Aquinas.

  Those things are beautiful the apprehension of which pleases.
Therefore beauty is that quality of a sensible object in virtue
of which its apprehension pleases or satisfies the aesthetic
appetite which desires to apprehend the most satisfying relations
of the sensible. Now the act of apprehension involves at least
two activities, the activity of cognition or simple perception
and the activity of recognition. If the activity of simple
perception is, like every other activity, itself pleasant, every
sensible object that has been apprehended can be said in the
first place to have been and to be in a measure beautiful; and
even the most hideous object can be said to have been and to be
beautiful in so far as it has been apprehended. In regard then to
that part of the act of apprehension which is called the activity
of simple perception there is no sensible object which cannot be
said to be in a measure beautiful.
  With regard to the second part of the act of apprehension which
is called the activity of recognition it may further be said that
there is no activity of simple perception to which there does not
succeed in whatsoever measure the activity of recognition. For by
the activity of recognition is meant an activity of decision; and
in accordance with this activity in all conceivable cases a
sensible object is said to be satisfying or dissatisfying. But
the activity of recognition is, like every other activity, itself
pleasant and therefore every object that has been apprehended is
secondly in whatsoever measure beautiful. Consequently even the
most hideous object may be said to be beautiful for this reason
as it is <a priori> said to be beautiful in so far as it
encounters the activity of simple perception .
  Sensible objects, however, are said conventionally to be
beautiful or not for neither of the foregoing reasons but rather
by reason of the nature, degree and duration of the satisfaction
resulting from the apprehension of them and it is in accordance
with these latter merely that the words 'beautiful' and 'ugly'
are used in practical aesthetic philosophy. It remains then to be
said that these words indicate only a greater or less measure of
resultant satisfaction and that any sensible object, to which the
word 'ugly' is practically applied, an object, that is, the
apprehension of which results in a small measure of aesthetic
satisfaction, is, in so far as its apprehension results in any
measure of satisfaction whatsoever, said to be for the third time
beautiful ....
                                   J. A. J. Pola, 15 XI 04.

                       The Act of Apprehension
  It has been said that the act of apprehension involves at least
two activities -- the activity of cognition or simple perception
and the activity of recognition. The act of apprehension,
however, in its most complete form involves three activities--the
third being the activity of satisfaction. By reason of the fact
that these three activities are all pleasant themselves every
sensible object that has been apprehended must be doubly and may
be trebly beautiful. In practical aesthetic philosophy the
epithets 'beautiful' and 'ugly' are applied with regard chiefly
to the third activity, with regard, that is, to the nature,
degree and duration of the satisfaction resultant from the
apprehension of any sensible object and therefore any sensible
object to which in practical aesthetic philosophy the epithet
'beautiful' is applied must be trebly beautiful, must have
encountered, that is, the three activities which are involved in
the act of apprehension in its most complete form. Practically
then the quality of beauty in itself must involve three
constituents to encounter each of these three activities ....
                                   J. A. J. Pola. 16 XI 04.       
