
42.   Essay   1912


William Blake

                          [Text begins]

  of an ethical and practical interpretation, are not moral
aphorisms. Looking at St. Paul's cathedral, Blake heard with the
ear of the soul the cry of the little chimney sweep, who
symbolizes oppressed innocence in his strange literary language.
Looking at Buckingham Palace, he sees with the eye of the mind
the sigh of the hapless soldier running down the palace wall in
the form of a drop of blood.l While he was still young and
vigorous, remaking himself with these visions, he had the power
to etch their image in a hammered verse or a sheet of copper, and
these verbal or mental etchings often comprise an entire
sociological system. The prison, he writes, is built with stones
of law; the brothel with bricks of religion. But the continual
strain of these voyages into the unknown and the abrupt return to
natural life slowly but inexorably corrode his artistic power.
The visions, multiplying, blind the sight; and toward the end of
his mortal life, the unknown for which he yearned covered him
with the shadows of vast wings, and the angels with whom he
conversed as an immortal with immortals hid him in the silence of
their garments.
  If I have evoked from the shades with bitter words and violent
verses the figure of a weak, second or third rank politician, I
have given you the wrong idea of Blake's personality. As a young
man he belonged to the literary-revolutionary school that
included Miss Wollstonecraft, and the famous, perhaps I should
say the notorious, author of the <Rights of Man>, Thomas Paine.
Even among the members of this circle, Blake was the only one
with the courage to wear in the street the red cap, emblem of the
new era. He soon took it off, though, never to wear it again,
after the massacres in the Paris prisons that occurred in
September 1792. His spiritual rebellion against the powers of
this world was not made of the kind of gunpowder, soluble in
water, to which we are more or less accustomed. In 1799, he was
offered the position of drawing master to the royal family.
Afraid that in the artificial atmosphere of the court his art
might die of inanition, he refused it; but at the same time, in
order not to offend the king, he gave up all the other
lower-class students that formed his major source of income.
After his death, Princess Sophia sent his widow a private gift of
a hundred pounds sterling. Mrs. Blake sent it back, thanking her
politely, saying that she was able to get along on little, and
that she didn't want to accept the gift because, if it were used
for another purpose, the money might help to restore the life and
hopes of someone less fortunate than her.
  There was evidently a distinct difference between that
undisciplined and visionary heresiarch and those most orthodox
church philosophers, Francesco Suarez, <Europae atque orbis
universi magister et oculus populi Christiani>, and Don Giovanni
Mariana di Talavera, who had written for the stupefaction of
posterity a logical and sinister defence of tyrannicide in the
preceding century. The same idealism that possessed and sustained
Blake when he hurled his lightning against human evil and misery
prevented him from being cruel to the body even of a sinner, the
frail curtain of flesh, as he calls it in the mystical book of
<Thel>, that lies on the bed of our desire. The episodes that
show the primitive goodness of his heart are numerous in the
story of his life. Although he had difficulty making a living and
spent only half a guinea a week to maintain the little house
where he lived, he gave forty pounds to a needy friend. Having
seen a poor, phthisic art student pass his window each morning
with a portfolio under his arm, he took pity on him and invited
him into the house, where he fed him and tried to cheer his sad
and dwindling life. His relations with his younger brother Robert
recall the story of David and Jonathan. Blake loved him,
supported him, and took care of him. During his long sickness, he
spoke to him of the eternal world and comforted him. For many
days before his death, he watched over his sickbed without
interruption, and at the supreme moment he saw the beloved soul
break loose from the lifeless body and rise toward heaven
clapping its hands for joy. Then, serene and exhausted, he lay
down in a deep sleep and slept for seventy-two hours in a row.
  I have already referred to Mrs. Blake two or three times, and
perhaps I should say something about the poet's married life.
Blake fell in love when he was twenty years old. The girl, who
was rather foolish it seems, was named Polly Woods. The influence
of this youthful love shines through Blake's first works, the
Poetical Sketches and Songs of Innocence, but the incident ended
suddenly and brusquely. She thought him crazy, or little better,
and he thought her a flirt, or something worse. This girl's face
appears in certain drawings in the prophetic book of Vala, a soft
and smiling face, symbol of the sweet cruelty of woman, and of
the illusion of the senses. To recuperate from this defeat, Blake
left London and went to live in the cottage of a gardener named
Bouchier. This gardener had a daughter, Catherine, about
twenty-four, whose heart was filled with compassion at hearing of
the young man's misfortune in love. The affection born from this
pity and its recognition finally united them. The lines from
Othello:

        She loved me for the dangers I had passed,
        And I loved her that she did pity them.

come to mind when we read this chapter of Blake's life.
  Like many other men of great genius, Blake was not attracted to
cultured and refined women. Either he preferred to drawing-room
graces and an easy and broad culture (if you will allow me to
borrow a commonplace from theatrical jargon) the simple woman, of
hazy and sensual mentality, or, in his unlimited egoism, he
wanted the soul of his beloved to be entirely a slow and painful
creation of his own, freeing and purifying daily under his very
eyes, the demon (as he says) hidden in the cloud. Whichever is
true, the fact is that Mrs. Blake was neither very pretty nor
very intelligent. In fact, she was illiterate, and the poet took
pains to teach her to read and write. He succeeded so well that
within a few years his wife was helping him in his engraving
work, retouching his drawings, and was cultivating in herself the
visionary faculty.
  Elemental beings and spirits of dead great men often came to
the poet's room at night to speak with him about art and the
imagination. Then Blake would leap out of bed, and, seizing his
pencil, remain long hours in the cold London night drawing the
limbs and lineaments of the visions, while his wife, curled up
beside his easy chair, held his hand lovingly and kept quiet so
as not to disturb the visionary ecstasy of the seer. When the
vision had gone, about daybreak his wife would get back into bed,
and Blake, radiant with joy and benevolence, would quickly begin
to light the fire and get breakfast for the both of them. We are
amazed that the symbolic beings Los and Urizen and Vala and
Tiriel and Enitharmon and the shades of Milton and Homer came
from their ideal world to a poor London room, and no other
incense greeted their coming than the smell of East Indian tea
and eggs fried in lard. Isn't this perhaps the first time in the
history of the world that the Eternal spoke through the mouth of
the humble?
  So the mortal life of William Blake unfolded. The bark of his
married life that had weighed anchor under the auspices of pity
and gratitude sailed among the usual rocks for almost half a
century. There were no children. In the early years of their life
together there were discords, misunderstandings easy to
understand if we keep in mind the great difference in culture and
temperament that separated the young couple. It is even true, as
I said before, that Blake almost followed Abraham's example of
giving to Hagar what Sarah refused.l The vestal simplicity of his
wife ill accorded with the temperament of Blake, for whom until
the last days of his life exuberance was the only beauty. In a
scene of tears and accusations that occurred between them, his
wife fell in a faint, and injured herself in such a way that she
was unable to have children. It is a sad irony to think that this
poet of childish innocence, the only writer who has written songs
for children with the soul of a child, and who has illuminated
the phenomenon of gestation with a light so tender and mystical
in his strange poem <The Chrystal Cabinet>, was destined never to
see the sight of a real human child at his fireside. To him who
had such great pity for everything that lives and suffers and
rejoices in the illusions of the vegetable world, for the fly,
the hare, the little chimney sweep, the robin, even for the flea,
was denied any other fatherhood than the spiritual fatherhood,
intensely natural though it is, that still lives in the lines of
Proverbs:l

    He who mocks the Infant's Faith
    Shall be mock'd in Age & Death.
    He who shall teach the Child to Doubt
    The rotting Grave shall ne'er get out.
    He who respects the Infant's faith
    Triumphs over Hell & Death.

  Over Blake's fearless and immortal spirit, the rotting grave
and the king of terrors had no power. In his old age, surrounded
at last by friends and disciples and admirers, he began, like
Cato the Elder, to study a foreign language. That language was
the same in which tonight I try, by your leave, in so far as I
can, to recall his spirit from the twilight of the universal
mind, to detain it for a minute and question it. He began to
study Italian in order to read the <Divina Commedia> in the
original and to illustrate Dante's vision with mystical drawings.
Gaunt and weakened by the afflictions of illness, he would prop
himself up on several pillows and spread a large drawing-book on
his knees, forcing himself to trace the lines of his last vision
on the white pages. It is the attitude in which he lives for us
in Phillips' drawing in the National Gallery in London. His brain
did not weaken; his hand did not lose its old mastery. Death came
to him in the form of a glacial cold, like the tremors of
cholera, which possessed his limbs and put out the light of his
intelligence in a moment, as the cold darkness that we call space
covers and extinguishes the light of a star. He died singing in a
strong, resounding voice that made the rafters ring. He was
singing, as always, of the ideal world, of truth, the intellect
and the divinity of the imagination. 'My beloved, the songs that
I sing are not mine,' he said to his wife, 'no, no, I tell you
they are not mine.'
  A full study of Blake's personality should logically be divided
into three phases--the pathological, the theosophical, and the
artistic. The first, I believe, we can dismiss without many
qualms. Saying that a great genius is mad, while at the same time
recognizing his artistic worth, is like saying that he had
rheumatism or suffered from diabetes. Madness, in fact, is a
medical term that can claim no more notice from the objective
critic than he grants the charge of heresy raised by the
theologian, or the charge of immorality raised by the police. If
we must accuse of madness every great genius who does not believe
in the hurried materialism now in vogue with the happy
fatuousness of a recent college graduate in the exact sciences,
little remains for art and universal philosophy. Such a slaughter
of the innocents would take in a large part of the peripatetic
system, all of medieval metaphysics, a whole branch of the
immense symmetrical edifice constructed by the Angelic Doctor,
St. Thomas Aquinas, Berkeley's idealism, and (what a combination)
the scepticism that ends with Hume. With regard to art, then,
those very useful figures, the photographer and court
stenographer, would get by all the more easily. The presentation
of such an art and such a philosophy, flowering in the more or
less distant future in the union of the two social forces felt
more strongly in the market-place every day -- women and the
proletariat -- will reconcile, if nothing else, every artist and
philosopher to the shortness of life on earth.
  To determine what position Blake must be assigned in the
hierarchy of occidental mystics goes beyond the scope of this
lecture. It seems to me that Blake is not a great mystic. The
orient is the paternal home of mysticism, and now that linguistic
studies have put us in the position to understand oriental
thought (if that ideational energy that created the vast cycles
of spiritual activity and passivity of which the <Upanishads>
speak can be called thought) the mystical books of the occident
shine, if at all, with a reflected light. Blake is probably less
inspired by Indian mysticism than Paracelsus, Jacob Behmen, or
Swedenborg; at any rate, he is less objectionable. In him, the
visionary faculty is directly connected with the artistic
faculty. One must be, in the first place, well-disposed to
mysticism, and in the second place, endowed with the patience of
a saint in order to get an idea of what Paracelsus and Behmen
mean by their cosmic exposition of the involution and evolution
of mercury, salt, sulphur, body, soul and spirit. Blake naturally
belongs to another category, that of the artists, and in this
category he occupies, in my opinion, a unique position, because
he unites keenness of intellect with mystical feeling. This first
quality is almost completely lacking in mystical art. St. John of
the Cross, for example, one of the few idealist artists worthy to
stand with Blake, never reveals either an innate sense of form or
a coordinating force of the intellect in his book <The Dark Night
of the Soul>, that cries and faints with such an ecstatic
passion.
  The explanation lies in the fact that Blake had two spiritual
masters, very different from each other, yet alike in their
formal precision--Michelangelo Buonarotti and Emanuel Swedenborg.
The first of Blake's mystical drawings that we have, <Joseph of
Arimathea among the Rocks of Albion>, has in one corner the
words: <Michelangelo pinxit>. It is modelled after a sketch made
by Michelangelo for his <Last Judgment>, and symbolizes the
poetic imagination in the power of the sensual philosophy.
Beneath the drawing Blake has written: 'This is one of the Gothic
Artists who built the cathedrals in what we call the Dark Ages,
wandering about in sheepskins and goatskins, of whom the world
was not worthy.' Michelangelo's influence is felt in all of
Blake's work, and especially in some passages of prose collected
in the fragments, in which he always insists on the importance of
the pure, clean line that evokes and creates the figure on the
background of the uncreated void.
  The influence of Swedenborg, who died in exile in London when
Blake was beginning to write and draw, is seen in the glorified
humanity with which all of Blake's work is stamped. Swedenborg,
who frequented all of the invisible worlds for several years,
sees in the image of man heaven itself and Michael, Raphael, and
Gabriel, who, according to him, are not three angels, but three
angelic choirs. Eternity, which had appeared to the beloved
disciple and to St. Augustine as a heavenly city, and to
Alighieri as a heavenly rose, appeared to the Swedish mystic in
the likeness of a heavenly man, animated in all his limbs by a
fluid angelic life that forever leaves and re-enters, systole and
diastole of love and wisdom. From this vision he developed that
immense system of what he called correspondences which runs
through his masterpiece <Arcana Coelestia>, the new Gospel which,
according to him, will be the apparition in the heavens of the
Son of Man foretold by St. Matthew.
  Armed with this two-edged sword, the art of Michelangelo and
the revelations of Swedenborg, Blake killed the dragon of
experience and natural wisdom, and, by minimizing space and time
and denying the existence of memory and the senses, he tried to
paint his works on the void of the divine bosom. To him, each
moment shorter than a pulse-beat was equivalent in its duration
to six thousand years, because in such an infinitely short
instant the work of the poet is conceived and born. To him, all
space larger than a red globule of human blood was visionary,
created by the hammer of Los, while in a space smaller than a
globule of blood we approach eternity, of which our vegetable
world is but a shadow. Not <with> the eye, then, but <beyond> the
eye, the soul and the supreme love must look, because the eye,
which was born in the night while the soul was sleeping in rays
of light, will also die in the night. Dionysius the
pseudo-Areopagite, in his book <De Divinis Nominibus>, arrives at
the throne of God by denying and overcoming every moral and
metaphysical attribute, and falling into ecstasy and prostrating
himself before the divine obscurity, before that unutterable
immensity which precedes and encompasses the supreme knowledge in
the eternal order. The mental process by which Blake arrives at
the threshold of the infinite is a similar process. Flying from
the infinitely small to the infinitely large, from a drop of
blood to the universe of stars, his soul is consumed by the
rapidity of flight, and finds itself renewed and winged and
immortal on the edge of the dark ocean of God. And although he
based his art on such idealist premises, convinced that eternity
was in love with the products of time, the sons of God with the
sons of

                       [Text ends]
