
29.   Daily Express, October 30, 1903.


The Bruno Philosophy

"Giordano Bruno." By J. Lewis McIntyre.
              Macmillan and Co., London. 1903.

  Except for a book in the English or (!) Foreign Philosophical
Library, a book the interest of which was chiefly biographical,
no considerable volume has appeared in England to give an account
of the life and philosophy of the heresiarch martyr of Nola.
Inasmuch as Bruno was born about the middle of the 16th century,
an appreciation of him -- and that appreciation the first to
appear in England -- cannot but seem somewhat belated now. Less
than a third of this book is devoted to Bruno's life, and the
rest of the book to an exposition and comparative survey of his
system. That life reads like a heroic fable in these days of
millionaires. A Dominican monk, a gipsy professor, a commentator
of old philosophies and a deviser of new ones, a playwright, a
polemist, a counsel for his own defence, and finally, a martyrS
burned at the stake in the Campo dei Fiori -- Bruno, through all
these modes and accidents (as he would have called them) of
being, remains a consistent spiritual unity.
  Casting away tradition with the courage of early humanism,
Bruno has hardly brought to his philosophical enquiry the
philosophical method of a peripatetic. His active brain
continually utters hypotheses; his vehement temper continually
urges him to recriminate; and though the hypothesis may be
validly used by the philosopher in speculation and the
countercheck quarrelsome be allowed him upon occasion, hypotheses
and recriminations fill so many of Bruno's pages that nothing is
easier than to receive from them an inadequate and unjust notion
of a great lover of wisdom. Certain parts of his philosophy --
for it is many-sided -- may be put aside. His treatises on
memory, commentaries on the art of Raymond Lully, his excursions
into that treacherous region from which even ironical Aristotle
did not come undiscredited, the science of morality, have an
interest only because they are so fantastical and middle aged.
  As an independent observer, Bruno, however, deserves high
honour. More than Bacon or Descartes must he be considered the
father of what is called modern philosophy. His system by turns
rationalist and mystic, theistic and pantheistic is everywhere
impressed with his noble mind and critical intellect, and is full
of that ardent sympathy with nature as it is -- natura naturata
-- which is the breath of the Renaissance. In his attempt to
reconcile the matter and form of the Scholastics -- formidable
names, which in his system as spirit and body retain little of
their metaphysical character -- Bruno has hardily put forward an
hypothesis, which is a curious anticipation of Spinoza. Is it not
strange, then, that Coleridge should have set him down a dualist,
a later Heraclitus, and should have represented him as saying in
effect very power in nature or in spirit must evolve an opposite
as the sole condition and means of its manifestation; and every
opposition is, therefore, a tendency to reunion."
  And yet it must be the chief claim of any system like Bruno's
that it endeavours to simplify the complex. That idea of an
ultimate principle, spiritual, indifferent, universal, related to
any soul or to any material thing, as the Materia Prima of
Aquinas is related to any material thing, unwarranted as it may
seem in the view of critical philosophy, has yet a distinct value
for the historian of religious ecstacies. It is not Spinoza, it
is Bruno, that is the god-intoxicated man. Inwards from the
material universe, which, however, did not seem to him, as to the
Neo-platonists, the kingdom of the soul's malady, or as to the
Christians a place of probation, but rather his opportunity for
spiritual activity, he passes, and from heroic enthusiasm to
enthusiasm to unite himself with God. His mysticism is little
allied to that of Molinos or to that of St. John of the Cross;
there is nothing in it of quietism or of the dark cloister: it is
strong, suddenly rapturous, and militant. The death of the body
is for him the cessation of a mode of being, and in virtue of
this belief and of that robust character "prevaricating yet
firm," which is an evidence of that belief, he becomes of the
number of those who loftily do not fear to die. For us his
vindication of the freedom of intuition must seem an enduring
monument, and among those who waged so honourable a war, his
legend must seem the most honourable, more sanctified, and more
ingenuous than that of Averroes or of Scotus Erigena.
