
41.   Il Piccolo della Sera,   December 22, 1910


The Home Rule Comet

  The idea of Irish autonomy has gradually become surrounded with
a pallid and tenuous substantiality, and just a few weeks ago,
when a royal decree dissolved the English parliament, something
pale and wavering was seen dawning in the East. It was the Home
Rule comet, vague, distant, but as punctual as ever. The
sovereign Word which in an instant made twilight fall on the
demi-gods at Westminster had called from the darkness and the
void the obedient and unknowing star.
  This time, however, it could be made out very poorly because
the skies were cloudy. The fog which usually covers the British
shores grew so thick that it cloaked them in a fixed and
impenetrable cloud bank, behind which could be heard the
orchestral music of the electoral elements in discord -- the
fiddles of the nobles agitated and hysterical, the raucous horns
of the people,and, from time to time, a passing phrase on the
Irish flutes.
  The uncertainty of the political situation in England is
evident from the fact that their agencies hurl forth from morning
to night enigmatic dispatches which contradict themselves. In
fact, the tenor of the debates held recently in the United
Kingdom makes an impartial examination of the situation very
difficult. Aside from the three party heads, Asquith, Balfour,
and Redmond, who always know how to maintain a certain dignified
bearing not unbecoming to fatuous leaders, the electoral campaign
which has just ended indicates a significant lowering of the tone
of English public life. Has such a speech ever been heard from
the lips of the Chancellor of the Exchequer? the Conservatives
are asked. But the jibes of the warlike Welsh minister pale
before the vulgar vituperations of Conservatives like
representative Smith,l and the well known lawyer Carson and the
director of the 'National Review', while the two Irish factions,
forgetting their common enemy, have waged underground war in an
attempt to exhaust the gamut of coarse language.
  Another cause of confusion is that the English parties no
longer answer to their names. It is the Radicals who want to
continue the present political tariff policy of free trade, while
the Conservatives champion tariff reform at the top of their
voices. It is the Conservatives who want to take away the
legislative power from Parliament and give it instead to the
nation as a whole by means of the plebiscite. Finally, it is the
clerical and intransigent Irish party which comprises the
majority of an anticlerical and Liberal government.
  This paradoxical situation is accurately reflected in the
characters of the party heads. Not to speak of Chamberlain or
Rosebery, who have gone, respectively, from extreme Radicalism
and Gladstonian Liberalism to the ranks of Imperialism (while the
young minister Churchill has made his ideal voyage in the
opposite direction). We find the causes of Anglican Protestantism
and of conciliatory Nationalism led by a religious renegade and a
converted Fenian.
  Balfour, in fact, a worthy disciple of the Scottish school, is
a sceptic rather than a politician, who, urged more by the
instinct for nepotism innate in the Cecil family than by
individual choice, assumed the leadership of the Conservative
party after the death of his uncle, the lamented Marquis of
Salisbury. Not a day passes that the reporters fail to point out
his distracted and quibbling attitude. His tricks make his own
followers laugh. And even if the orthodox army has met with three
consecutive clashes under his vacillating flag, each more serious
than the last, his biographer (who perhaps will be another member
of the Cecil family) will be able to say of him that in his
philosophical essays he dissected and laid bare with great art
the intimate fibres of the religious and psychological principles
whose champion he became by a turn of the parliamentary wheel.
O'Brien, the 'leader' of the Irish dissidents, who calls his band
of 10 representatives the 'All for Ireland' party, has become
what every good fanatic becomes when his fanaticism dies before
he does. Now he fights in league with the Unionist magistrates
who would probably have issued a warrant for his arrest twenty
years ago; and nothing remains of his fiery youth except those
violent outbursts which make him seem epileptic.
  In the midst of such confusions it is easy to understand how
the dispatches contradict themselves, and announce that Home Rule
is at the door, and write its obituary six hours later. The
uninitiated cannot be too sure in the case of comets, but at any
rate the passage of the celestial body so long awaited has been
communicated to us by the official observatory.

                  *      *      *       *

  Last week, the Irish leader Redmond proclaimed the happy news
to a crowd of fishermen. English democracy, he said, has broken
the power of the Lords once and for all, and within a few weeks,
perhaps, Ireland will have her independence. Now, it is necessary
to be a voracious nationalist to be able to swallow such a
mouthful. As soon as it is seated on the ministerial benches, the
Liberal cabinet will be confronted by a conglomeration of
troubles, among which the foremost is the double balance. When
this matter is settled for good or for bad, peers and commoners
will declare a treaty of peace in honour of the coronation of
George V. So far the way is clear, but only prophets can tell us
where a government as heterogeneous as the present one will end.
To remain in power, will it try to appease the Welsh and the
Scots with ecclesiastical and agrarian measures ? If the Irish
exact autonomy as the price for the support of their votes, will
the cabinet hasten to blow the dust off one of their many Home
Rule bills and present it to the House again?
  The history of Anglo-Saxon liberalism teaches us the answer to
these and similarly ingenuous questions very clearly. The Liberal
ministers are scrupulous men, and once again the Irish problem
will cause symptomatic rifts in the body of the cabinet, in the
face of which it will plainly appear that the English electorate
really did not authorize the government to legislate in its
favour. And, following the Liberal strategy (which aims to wear
down the separatist sentiment slowly and secretly, while creating
a new, eager social class, dependent, and free from dangerous
enthusiasms, by means of partial concessions), if the government
introduces a reform bill, or the semblance of one, which Ireland
will haughtily refuse, will not that be the propitious moment for
the intervention of the Conservative party? Faithful to its
cynical tradition of bad faith, will it not take this occasion to
declare the Irish dictatorship intolerable, and start a campaign
to reduce the number of Irish members from 80 to 40 on the basis
of the depopulation, more unique than rare in a civilized
country, which was and still is the bitter fruit of
misgovernment?
  The connection, then, between the abolition of the Lords' veto
and the granting of autonomy to the Irish is not as immediate as
some would have us believe. In the final count, that is the
business of the English themselves, and admitting that the
English people no longer have the worship for their spiritual and
temporal fathers that they once had, it is still probable that
they will proceed with the reform of the upper house as slowly
and cautiously as they are proceeding with the reform of their
medieval laws, with the reform of their pompous and hypocritical
literature, with the reform of their monstrous judicial system.
And in anticipation of these reforms, it will matter very little
to the credulous ploughman in Ireland whether Lord Lansdowne or
Sir Edward Grey rules the lot of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

                    *      *      *       *

  The fact that Ireland now wishes to make common cause with
British democracy should neither surprise nor persuade anyone.
For seven centuries she has never been a faithful subject of
England. Neither, on the other hand, has she been faithful to
herself. She has entered the British domain without forming an
integral part of it. She has abandoned her own language almost
entirely and accepted the language of the conqueror without being
able to assimilate the culture or adapt herself to the mentality
of which this language is the vehicle. She has betrayed her
heroes, always in the hour of need and always without gaining
recompense. She has hounded her spiritual creators into exile
only to boast about them. She has served only one master well,
the Roman Catholic Church, which, however, is accustomed to pay
its faithful in long term drafts.
  What long term alliance can exist between this strange people
and the new Anglo-Saxon democracy? The phrase-makers who speak so
warmly about it today will soon see (if they do not see it
already) that between the English nobles and the English workers
there is a mysterious communion of blood; and that the highly
praised Marquis of Salisbury, a refined gentleman, spoke not only
for his caste but for his race when he said: 'Let the Irish stew
in their own juice.'
                             JAMES JOYCE                          
