
5.   Essay   1900


Drama and Life

  Although the relations between drama and life are, and must be,
of the most vital character, in the history of drama itself these
do not seem to have been at all times, consistently in view. The
earliest and best known drama, this side of the Caucasus, is that
of Greece. I do not propose to attempt anything in the nature of
a historical survey but cannot pass it by. Greek drama arose out
of the cult of Dionysos, who, god of fruitage, joyfulness and
earliest art, offered in his life-story a practical groundplan
for the erection of a tragic and a comic theatre. In speaking of
Greek drama it must be borne in mind that its rise dominated its
form. The conditions of the Attic stage suggested a syllabus of
greenroom proprieties and cautions to authors, which in after
ages were foolishly set up as the canons of dramatic art, in all
lands. Thus the Greeks handed down a code of laws which their
descendants with purblind wisdom forthwith advanced to the
dignity of inspired pronouncements. Beyond this, I say nothing.
It may be a vulgarism, but it is literal truth to say that Greek
drama is played out.l For good or for bad it has done its work,
which, if wrought in gold, was not upon lasting pillars. Its
revival is not of dramatic but of pedagogic significance. Even in
its own camp it has been superseded. When it had thriven over
long in hieratic custody and in ceremonial form, it began to pall
on the Aryan genius. A reaction ensued, as was inevitable; and as
the classical drama had been born of religion, its follower arose
out of a movement in literature. In this reaction England played
an important part, for it was the power of the Shakespearean
clique that dealt the deathblow to the already dying drama.
Shakespeare was before all else a literary artist; humour,
eloquence, a gift of seraphic music, theatrical instincts -- he
had a rich dower of these. The work, to which he gave such
splendid impulse, was of a higher nature than that which it
followed. It was far from mere drama, it was literature in
dialogue Here I must draw a line of demarcation between
literature and drama.
  Human society is the embodiment of changeless laws which the
whimsicalities and circumstances of men and women involve and
overwrap. The realm of literature is the realm of these
accidental manners and humours--a spacious realm; and the true
literary artist concerns himself mainly with them. Drama has to
do with the underlying laws first, in all their nakedness and
divine severity, and only secondarily with the motley agents who
bear them out. When so much is recognized an advance has been
made to a more rational and true appreciation of dramatic art.
Unless some such distinction be made the result is chaos.
Lyricism parades as poetic drama, psychological conversation as
literary drama, and traditional farce moves over the boards with
the label of comedy affixed to it.
  Both of these dramas having done their work as prologues to the
swelling act, they may be relegated to the department of literary
curios. It is futile to say that there is no new drama or to
contend that its proclamation is a huge boom. Space is valuable
and I cannot combat these assertions. However it is to me
dayclear that dramatic drama must outlive its elders, whose life
is only eked by the most dexterous management and the carefullest
husbanding. Over this New School some hard hits have been given
and taken. The public is slow to seize truth, and its leaders
quick to miscall it. Many, whose palates have grown accustomed to
the old food, cry out peevishly against a change of diet. To
these use and want is the seventh heaven. Loud are their praises
of the bland blatancy of Corneille, the starchglaze of Trapassi's
godliness, the Pumblechookian woodenness of Calderon. Their
infantile plot juggling sets them agape, so superfine it is. Such
critics are not to be taken seriously but they are droll figures
! It is of course patently true that the 'new' school masters
them on their own ground. Compare the skill of Haddon Chambers
and Douglas Jerrold, of Sudermann and Lessing. The 'new' school
in this branch of its art is superior. This superiority is only
natural, as it accompanies work of immeasurably higher calibre.
Even the least part of Wagner -- his music -- is beyond Bellini.
Spite of the outcry of these lovers of the past, the masons are
building for Drama, an ampler and loftier home, where there shall
be light for gloom, and wide porches for drawbridge and keep.
  Let me explain a little as to this great visitant. By drama I
understand the interplay of passions to portray truth; drama is
strife, evolution, movement in whatever way unfolded; it exists,
before it takes form, independently; it is conditioned but not
controlled by its scene. It might be said fantastically that as
soon as men and women began life in the world there was above
them and about them, a spirit, of which they were dimly
conscious, which they would have had sojourn in their midst in
deeper intimacy and for whose truth they became seekers in after
times, longing to lay hands upon it. For this spirit is as the
roaming air, little susceptible of change, and never left their
vision, shall never leave it, till the firmament is as a scroll
rolled away. At times it would seem that the spirit had taken up
his abode in this or that form -- but on a sudden he is misused,
he is gone and the abode is left idle. He is, one might guess,
somewhat of an elfish nature, a nixie, a very Ariel. So we must
distinguish him and his house. An idyllic portrait, or an
environment of haystacks does not constitute a pastoral play, no
more than rhodomontade and sermonizing build up a tragedy.l
Neither quiescence nor vulgarity shadow forth drama. However
subdued the tone of passions may be, however ordered the action
or commonplace the diction, if a play or a work of music or a
picture presents the everlasting hopes, desires and hates of us,
or deals with a symbolic presentment of our widely related
nature, albeit a phase of that nature, then it is drama. I shall
not speak here of its many forms. In every form that was not fit
for it, it made an outburst, as when the first sculptor separated
the feet. Morality, mystery, ballet, pantomine, opera, all these
it speedily ran through and discarded. Its proper form 'the
drama' is yet intact. 'There are many candles on the high altar,
though one fall.'
  Whatever form it takes must not be superimposed or
conventional. In literature we allow conventions, for literature
is a comparatively low form of art. Literature is kept alive by
tonics, it flourishes through conventions in all human relations,
in all actuality, Drama will be for the future at war with
convention, if it is to realize itself truly. If you have a clear
thought of the body of drama, it will be manifest what raiment
befits it. Drama of so wholehearted and admirable a nature cannot
but draw all hearts from the spectacular and the theatrical, its
note being truth and freedom in every aspect of it. It may be
asked what are we to do, in the words of Tolstoi. First, clear
our minds of cant and alter the falsehoods to which we have lent
our support. Let us criticize in the manner of free people, as a
free race, recking little of ferula and formula. The Folk is, I
believe, able to do so much. Securus judicat orbis terrarum, is
not too high a motto for all human artwork. Let us not overbear
the weak, let us treat with a tolerant smile the stale
pronouncements of those matchless serio-comics -- the
'litterateurs'. If a sanity rules the mind of the dramatic world
there will be accepted what is now the faith of the few, there
will be past dispute written up the respective grades of Macbeth
and The Master Builder. The sententious critic of the thirtieth
century may well say of them -- Between him and these there is a
great gulf fixed.
  There are some weighty truths which we cannot overpass, in the
relations between drama and the artist. Drama is essentially a
communal art and of widespread domain. The drama -- its fittest
vehicle almost presupposes an audience, drawn from all classes.
In an artloving and art-producing society the drama would
naturally take up its position at the head of all artistic
institutions. Drama is moreover of so unswayed, so
unchallengeable a nature that in its highest forms it all but
transcends criticism. It is hardly possible to criticize The Wild
Duck, for instance; one can only brood upon it as upon a personal
woe. Indeed in the case of all Ibsen's later work dramatic
criticism, properly so called, verges on impertinence. In every
other art personality, mannerism of touch, local sense, are held
as adornments, as additional charms. But here the artist forgoes
his very self and stands a mediator in awful truth before the
veiled face of God.
  If you ask me what occasions drama or what is the necessity for
it at all, I answer Necessity. It is mere animal instinct applied
to the mind. Apart from his world-old desire to get beyond the
flaming ramparts, man has a further longing to become a maker and
a moulder. That is the necessity of all art. Drama is again the
least dependent of all arts on its material. If the supply of
mouldable earth or stone gives out, sculpture becomes a memory,
if the yield of vegetable pigments ceases, the pictorial art
ceases. But whether there be marble or paints, there is always
the artstuff for drama. I believe further that drama arises
spontaneously out of life and is coeval with it. Every race has
made its own myths and it is in these that early drama often
finds an outlet. The author of Parsifal has recognized this and
hence his work is solid as a rock. When the mythus passes over
the borderline and invades the temple of worship, the
possibilities of its drama have lessened considerably. Even then
it struggles back to its rightful place, much to the discomfort
of the stodgy congregation.
  As men differ as to the rise, so do they as to the aims of
drama. It is in most cases claimed by the votaries of the antique
school that the drama should have special ethical claims, to use
their stock phrase, that it should instruct, elevate, and amuse.
Here is yet another gyve that the jailers have bestowed. I do not
say that drama may not fulfil any or all of these functions, but
I deny that it is essential that it should fulfil them. Art,
elevated into the overhigh sphere of religion, generally loses
its true soul in stagnant quietism. As to the lower form of this
dogma it is surely funny. This polite request to the dramatist to
please point a moral, to rival Cyrano, in iterating through each
act 'A la fin de l'envoi je touche' is amazing. Bred as it is of
an amiable-parochial disposition we can but waive it. Mr Beoerly
sacked with strychnine, or M. Coupeau in the horrors are nothing
short of piteous in a surplice and dalmatic apiece. However this
absurdity is eating itself fast, like the tiger of story, tail
first.
  A yet more insidious claim is the claim for beauty. As
conceived by the claimants beauty is as often anaemic
spirituality as hardy animalism. Then, chiefly because beauty is
to men an arbitrary quality and often lies no deeper than form,
to pin drama to dealing with it, would be hazardous. Beauty is
the swerga of the aesthete; but truth has a more ascertainable
and more real dominion. Art is true to itself when it deals with
truth. Should such an untoward event as a universal reformation
take place on earth, truth would be the very threshold of the
house beautiful.
  I have just one other claim to discuss, even at the risk of
exhausting your patience. I quote from Mr Beerbohm Tree. 'In
these days when faith is tinged with philosophic doubt, I believe
it is the function of art to give us light rather than darkness.
It should not point to our relationship with monkeys but rather
remind us of our affinity with the angels.' In this statement
there is a fair element of truth which however requires
qualification. Mr Tree contends that men and women will always
look to art as the glass wherein they may see themselves
idealized. Rather I should think that men and women seldom think
gravely on their own impulses towards art. The fetters of
convention bind them too strongly. But after all art cannot be
governed by the insincerity of the compact majority but rather by
those eternal conditions, says Mr Tree, which have governed it
from the first. I admit this as irrefutable truth. But it were
well we had in mind that those eternal conditions are not the
conditions of modern communities Art is marred by such mistaken
insistence on its religious, its moral, its beautiful, its
idealizing tendencies. A single Rembrandt is worth a gallery full
of Van Dycks. And it is this doctrine of idealism in art which
has in notable instances disfigured manful endeavour, and has
also fostered a babyish instinct to dive under blankets at the
mention of the bogey of realism. Hence the public disowns
Tragedy, unless she rattles her dagger and goblet, abhors Romance
which is not amenable to the laws of prosody, and deems it a sad
effect in art if, from the outpoured blood of hapless heroism,
there does not at once spring up a growth of sorrowful blossoms.
As in the very madness and frenzy of this attitude, people want
the drama to befool them, Purveyor supplies plutocrat with a
parody of life which the latter digests medicinally in a darkened
theatre, the stage literally battening on the mental offal of its
patrons.
  Now if these views are effete what will serve the purpose?
Shall we put life -- real life -- on the stage? No, says the
Philistine chorus, for it will not draw. What a blend of thwarted
sight and smug commercialism. Parnassus and the city Bank divide
the souls of the pedlars. Life indeed nowadays is often a sad
bore. Many feel like the Frenchman that they have been born too
late in a world too old, and their wanhope and nerveless
unheroism point on ever sternly to a last nothing, a vast
futility and meanwhile -- a bearing of fardels. Epic savagery is
rendered impossible by vigilant policing, chivalry has been
killed by the fashion oracles of the boulevards. There is no
clank of mail, no halo about gallantry, no hat-sweeping, no
roystering! The traditions of romance are upheld only in Bohemia.
Still I think out of the dreary sameness of existence, a measure
of dramatic life may be drawn. Even the most commonplace, the
deadest among the living, may play a part in a great drama. It is
a sinful foolishness to sigh back for the good old times, to feed
the hunger of us with the cold stones they afford. Life we must
accept as we see it before our eyes, men and women as we meet
them in the real world, not as we apprehend them in the world of
faery. The great human comedy in which each has share, gives
limitless scope to the true artist, to-day as yesterday and as in
years gone. The forms of things, as the earth's crust, are
changed. The timbers of the ships of Tarshish are falling asunder
or eaten by the wanton sea; time has broken into the fastnesses
of the mighty; the gardens of Armida are become as treeless
wilds. But the deathless passions, the human verities which so
found expression then, are indeed deathless, in the heroic cycle,
or in the scientific age, Lohengrin, the drama of which unfolds
itself in a scene of seclusion, amid half- lights, is not an
Antwerp legend but a world drama. Ghosts, the action of which
passes in a common parlour, is of universal import -- a deepset
branch on the tree, Igdrasil, whose roots are struck in earth,
but through whose higher leafage the stars of heaven are glowing
and astir. It may be that many have nothing to do with such
fable, or think that their wonted fare is all that is of need to
them. But as we stand on the mountains today, looking before and
after, pining for what is not, scarcely discerning afar the
patches of open sky; when the spurs threaten, and the track is
grown with briers, what does it avail that into our hands we have
given us a clouded cane for an alpenstock, or that we have dainty
silks to shield us against the eager, upland wind? The sooner we
understand our true position, the better; and the sooner then
will we be up and doing on our way. In the meantime, art, and
chiefly drama, may help us to make our resting places with a
greater insight and a greater foresight, that the stones of them
may be bravely builded, and the windows goodly and fair. '. . .
what will you do in our Society, Miss Hessel?' asked Rorlund--'I
will let in fresh air, Pastor.'--answered Lona.
                             JAS. A. JOYCE
                            January 10, 1900
