                    GIACOMO JOYCE

                   by James Joyce


Who? A pale face surrounded by heavy odorous furs.
Her movements are shy and nervous. She uses quizzing-
glasses.
<Yes>. a brief syllable. A brief laugh. A brief beat of the
eyelids.

Cobweb handwriting, traced long and fine with quiet
disdain and resignation: a young person of quality.


I launch forth on an easy wave of tepid speech: Sweden-
borg, the pseudo-Areopagite, Miguel de Molinos,
Joachim Abbas. The wave is spent. Her classmate, retwisting 
her twisted body, purrs in boneless Viennese
Italian: <Che coltura!> The long eyelids beat and lift: a
burning needleprick stings and quivers in the velvet
Iris.

High heels clack hollow on the resonant stone stairs.
Wintry air in the castle, gibbeted coats of mail, rude
iron sconces over the windings of the winding turret
stairs. Tapping clacking heels, a high and hollow noise.
There is one below would speak with your ladyship.

She never blows her nose. A form of speech: the lesser
for the greater.

Rounded and ripened: rounded by the lathe of inter-
marriage and ripened in the forcing-house of the seclusion
of her race.

A ricefield near Vercelli under creamy summer haze.
The wings of her drooping hat shadow her false smile.
Shadows streak her falsely smiling face, smitten by the
hot creamy light, grey wheyhued shadows under the
jawbones, streaks of eggyolk yellow on the moistened
brow, rancid yellow humour lurking within the softened 
pulp of the eyes.


A flower given by her to my daughter. Frail gift, frail
giver, frail blue-veined child.


Padua far beyond the sea. The silent middle age, night,
darkness of history sleep in the <Piazza delle Erbe> under
the moon. The city sleeps. Under the arches in the dark
streets near the river the whores' eyes spy out for fornicators.
<Cinque servizi per cinque franchi>. A dark wave
of sense, again and again and again.
        <Mine eyes fail in darkness, mine eyes fail,
        Mine eyes fail in darkness, love.>
Again. No more. Dark love, dark longing. No more.
Darkness.


Twilight. Crossing the <piazza>. Grey eve lowering on
wide sagegreen pasturelands, shedding silently dusk
and dew. She follows her mother with ungainly grace,
the mare leading her filly foal. Grey twilight moulds
softly the slim and shapely haunches, the meek supple
tendonous neck, the fine-boned skull. Eve, peace, the
dusk of wonder....... Hillo! Ostler! Hilloho!


Papa and the girls sliding downhill, astride of a toboggan: 
the Grand Turk and his harem. Tightly capped
and jacketted, boots laced in deft crisscross over the
flesh-warmed tongue, the short skirt taut from the round
knobs of the knees. A white flash: a flake, a snowflake:
      <And when she next doth ride abroad
      May I be there to see!>


I rush out of the tobacco-shop and call her name. She
turns and halts to hear my jumbled words of lessons,
hours, lessons, hours: and slowly her pale cheeks are
flushed with a kindling opal light. Nay, nay, be not
afraid!


<Mio padre>: she does the simplest acts with distinction.
<Unde derivatur? Mia figlia ha una grandissima ammirazione 
per il suo maestro inglese>. The old man's face,
handsome, flushed, with strongly Jewish features and
long white whiskers, turns towards me as we walk down
the hill together. O! Perfectly said: courtesy, benevolence, 
curiosity, trust, suspicion, naturalness, helplessness 
of age, confidence, frankness, urbanity, sincerity,
warning, pathos, compassion: a perfect blend. Ignatius
Loyola, make haste to help me!


This heart is sore and sad. Crossed in love?


Long lewdly leering lips: dark-blooded molluscs


Moving mists on the hill as I look upward from night
and mud. Hanging mists over the damp trees. A light
in the upper room. She is dressing to go to the play.
There are ghosts in the mirror ..... Candles! Candles!


<A gentle creature>. At midnight, after music, all the way
up the via San Michele, these words were spoken softly.
Easy now, Jamesy! Did you never walk the streets of
Dublin at night sobbing another name?


Corpses of Jews lie about me rotting in the mould of
their holy field. Here is the tomb of her people, black
stone, silence without hope ...... Pimply Meissel
brought me here. He is beyond those trees standing with
covered head at the grave of his suicide wife, wondering 
how the woman who slept in his bed has come to
this end .....  The tomb of her people and hers: black
stone, silence without hope: and all is ready. Do not die!


She raises her arms in an effort to hook at the nape of
her neck a gown of black veiling. She cannot: no, she
cannot. She moves backwards towards me mutely. I
raise my arms to help her: her arms fall. I hold the
websoft edges of her gown and drawing them out to
hook them I see through the opening of the black veil
her lithe body sheathed in an orange shift. It slips its
ribbons of moorings at her shoulders and falls slowly:
a lithe smooth naked body shimmering with silvery
scales. It slips slowly over the slender buttocks of smooth
polished silver and over their furrow, a tarnished silver
shadow .... Fingers, cold and calm and moving .... A
touch, a touch.


Small witless helpless and thin breath. But bend and
hear: a voice. A sparrow under the wheels of Juggernaut, 
shaking shaker of the earth. Please, mister God,
big mister God! Goodbye, big world! ....... <Aber das
ist eine Scweinerei!>


Great bows on her slim bronze shoes: spurs of a pampered fowl.


<The lady goes apace, apace, apace> ..... Pure air on the
upland road. Trieste is waking rawly: raw sunlight over
its huddled browntiled roofs, testudoform; a multitude
of prostrate bugs await a national deliverance. Belluomo
rises from the bed of his wife's lover's wife: the busy
housewife is astir, sloe-eyed, a saucer of acetic acid in
her hand ..... Pure air and silence on the upland road:
and hoofs. A girl on horseback. Hedda! Hedda Gabler!


The sellers offer on their altars the first fruits: green-
flecked lemons, jewelled cherries, shameful peaches
with torn leaves. The carriage passes through the lane
of canvas stalls, its wheel-spokes spinning in the glare.
Make way! Her father and his son sit in the carriage.
They have owls' eyes and owls' wisdom. Owlish wisdom
stares from their eyes brooding upon the lore of their
<Summa contra Gentiles>.


She thinks the Italian gentlemen were right to haul
Ettore Albini, the critic of the <Secolo>, from the stalls
because he did not stand up when the band played the
Royal March. She heard that at supper. Ay. They love
their country when they are quite sure which country
it is.

She listens: virgin most prudent.

A skirt caught back by her sudden moving knee; a
white lace edging of an underskirt lifted unduly; a leg-
stretched web of stocking. <Si pol?>


I play lightly, softly singing, John Dowland's languid
song. <Loth to depart>: I too am loth to go. That age is
here and now. Here, opening from the darkness of desire, 
are eyes that dim the breaking East, their shimmer
the shimmer of the scum that mantles the cesspool of
the court of slobbering James. Here are wines all ambered, 
dying fallings of sweet airs, the proud pavan,
kind gentlewomen wooing from their balconies with
sucking mouths, the pox-fouled wenches and young
wives that, gaily yielding to their ravishers, clip and
clip again.


In the raw veiled spring morning faint odours float of
morning Paris: aniseed, damp sawdust, hot dough of
bread: and as I cross the Pont Saint Michel the steel-
blue waking waters chill my heart. They creep and lap
about the island whereon men have lived since the
stone age..... Tawny gloom in the vast gargoyled
church. It is cold as on that morning: <quia frigus erat>.
Upon the steps of the far high altar, naked as the body
of the Lord, the ministers lie prostrate in weak prayer.
The voice of an unseen reader rises, intoning the lesson
from Hosea. <Haec dicit Dominus: in tribulatione sua
mane consurgent ad me. Venite et revertamur ad Dominum> .... 
She stands beside me, pale and chill,
clothed with the shadows of the sindark nave, her thin
elbow at my arm. Her flesh recalls the thrill of that
raw mist-veiled morning, hurrying torches, cruel eyes.
Her soul is sorrowful, trembles and would weep. Weep
not for me, O daughter of Jerusalem!


I expound Shakespeare to docile Trieste: Hamlet, quoth
I, who is most courteous to gentle and simple is
rude only to Polonius. Perhaps, an embittered idealist,
he can see in the parents of his beloved only grotesque 
attempts on the part of nature to produce her
image ........... Marked you that?


She walks before me along the corridor and as she walks
a dark coil of her hair slowly uncoils and falls. Slowly
uncoiling, falling hair. She does not know and walks
before me, simple and proud. So did she walk by Dante
in simple pride and so, stainless of blood and violation,
the daughter of Cenci, Beatrice, to her death:
                           ........ <Tie
     My girdle for me and bind up this hair
     In any simple knot.>


The housemaid tells me that they had to take her away
at once to the hospital, <poveretta>, that she suffered so
much, so much, <poveretta>, that it is very grave ...... I
walk away from her empty house. I feel that I am about
to cry. Ah, no! It will not be like that, in a moment,
without a word, without a look. No, no! Surely hell's
luck will not fail me!

Operated. The surgeon's knife has probed in her entrails
and withdrawn, leaving the raw jagged gash of its
passage on her belly. I see her full dark suffering eyes,
beautiful as the eyes of an antelope. O cruel wound!
Libidinous God!

Once more in her chair by the window, happy words
on her tongue, happy laughter. A bird twittering after
storm, happy that its little foolish life has fluttered out
of reach of the clutching fingers of an epileptic lord and
giver of life, twittering happily, twittering and chirping happily.


She says that, had <The Portrait of the Artist> been frank
only for frankness' sake, she would have asked why I
had given it to her to read. O you would, would you?
A lady of letters.

She stands black-robed at the telephone. Little timid
laughs, little cries, timid runs of speech suddenly
broken .... <Parlero colla mamma> .... Come! chook,
chook! come! The black pullet is frightened: little runs
suddenly broken, little timid cries: it is crying for its
mamma, the portly hen.


Loggione. The sodden walls ooze a steamy damp. A
symphony of smells fuses the mass of huddled human
forms: sour reek of armpits, nozzled oranges, melting
breast ointments, mastick water, the breath of suppers
of sulphurous garlic, foul phosphorescent farts, opoponax, 
the frank sweat of marriageable and married
womankind, the soapy stink of men ...... All night
I have watched her, all night I shall see her: braided
and pinnacled hair and olive oval face and calm soft
eyes. A green fillet upon her hair and about her body
a green-broidered gown: the hue of the illusion of the
vegetable glass of nature and of lush grass, the hair of
graves.


My words in her mind: cold polished stones sinking
through a quagmire.


Those quiet cold fingers have touched the pages, foul
and fair, on which my shame shall glow for ever. Quiet
and cold and pure fingers. Have they never erred?


Her body has no smell: an odourless flower.

On the stairs. A cold frail hand: shyness, silence: dark
langour-flooded eyes: weariness.


Whirling wreaths of grey vapour upon the heath. Her
face, how grey and grave! Dank matted hair. Her lips
press softly, her sighing breath comes through. Kissed.


My voice, dying in the echoes of its words, dies like the
wisdom-wearied voice of the Eternal calling on Abraham 
through echoing hills. She leans back against
the pillowed wall: odalisque-featured in the luxurious 
obscurity. Her eyes have drunk my thoughts:
and into the moist warm yielding welcoming darkness 
of her womanhood my soul, itself dissolving, has
streamed and poured and flooded a liquid and abundant
seed ...... Take her now who will! ....


As I come out of Ralli's house I come upon her suddenly
as we both are giving alms to a blind beggar. She
answers my sudden greeting by turning and averting
her black basilisk eyes. <E col suo vedere attosca l'uomo
quando lo vede>. I thank you for the word, messer
Brunetto.

They spread under my feet carpets for the son of man.
They await my passing. She stands in the yellow
shadow of the hall, a plaid cloak shielding from chills
her sinking shoulders: and as I halt in wonder and look
about me she greets me wintrily and passes up the
staircase darting at me for an instant out of her sluggish
sidelong eyes a jet of liquorish venom.

A soft crumpled peagreen cover drapes the lounge. A
narrow Parisian room. The hairdresser lay here but
now. I kissed her stocking and the hem of her rustblack
dusty skirt. It is the other. She. Gogarty came yesterday
to be introduced. <Ulysses> is the reason. Symbol of the
intellectual conscience .... Ireland then? And the husband? 
Pacing the corridor in list shoes or playing chess
against himself. Why are we left here? The hairdresser
lay here but now, clutching my head between her
knobby knees.... Intellectual symbol of my race.
Listen! The plunging gloom has fallen. Listen!
--I am not convinced that such activities of the mind
or body can be called unhealthy--
  She speaks. A weak voice from beyond the cold stars.
Voice of wisdom. Say on! O, say again, making me wise!
This voice I never heard.
  She coils towards me along the crumpled lounge. I
cannot move or speak. Coiling approach of starborn
flesh. Adultery of wisdom. No. I will go. I will.
--Jim, love!--
  Soft sucking lips kiss my left armpit: a coiling kiss
on myriad veins. I burn! I crumple like a burning leaf!
From my right armpit a fang of flame leaps out. A
starry snake has kissed me: a cold nightsnake. I am lost!
--Nora !--

Jan Pieters Sweelink. The quaint name of the old
Dutch musician makes all beauty seem quaint and far.
I hear his variations for the clavichord on an old air:
<Youth has an end>. In the vague mist of old sounds a
faint point of light appears: the speech of the soul is
about to be heard. Youth has an end: the end is here.
It will never be. You know that well. What then? Write
it, damn you, write it! What else are you good for?


"Why?"
"Because otherwise I could not see you."
Sliding--space--ages--foliage of stars--and waning
heaven--stillness--and stillness deeper--stillness of
annihilation--and her voice.

<Non hunc sed Barabbam!>

Unreadiness. A bare apartment. Torbid daylight. A
long black piano: coffin of music. Poised on its edge a
woman's hat, red-flowered, and umbrella, furled. Her
arms: a casque, gules, and blunt spear on a field, sable.

Envoy: Love me, love my umbrella.
