
37.   Il Piccolo della Sera,  May 19, 1907


Home Rule Comes of Age

  Twenty-one years ago, on the evening of April 9, 1886, the
streets that led to the office of the Nationalist newspaper in
Dublin were jammed with people. From time to time, a bulletin
printed in four-inch letters would appear on the wall, and in
this way the crowd was able to participate in the scene unfolding
at Westminster, where the galleries had been crammed full since
dawn. The Prime Minister's speech which had begun at four o'clock
lasted until eight. A few minutes later the final bulletin
appeared on the wall: 'Gladstone concluded with a magnificent
peroration declaring that the English Liberal party would refuse
to legislate for England until she granted a measure of autonomy
to Ireland.' At this news, the crowd in the street burst into
enthusiastic cries. On all sides was heard, 'Long live
Gladstone', 'Long live Ireland'. People who were complete
strangers shook hands to ratify the new national pact, and old
men wept for sheer joy.
  Seven years pass, and we are at the second Home Rule Act.
Gladstone, having in the meantime completed the moral
assassination of Parnell with the help of the Irish bishops,
reads his measure to the House for a third time. This speech is
shorter than the other; it lasts hardly an hour and a half. Then
the Home Rule Bill is passed. The happy news traverses the wires
to the Irish capital, where it arouses a new burst of enthusiasm.
In the main room of the Catholic Club, it is the subject of
joyous conversations, discussions, toasts and prophecies.
  Fourteen more years pass and we are at 1907. Twenty-one years
have passed since 1886; therefore the Gladstonian measure has
come of age, according to English custom. But in the interval
Gladstone himself has died and his measure is not yet born. As he
well foresaw, immediately after his third reading, the alarm
sounded in the upper House, and all the Lords spiritual and
temporal gathered at Westminster in a solid phalanx to give the
bill the coup de grace. The English Liberals forgot their
commitments. A fourth-rate politician who voted for every
coercive measure against Ireland from 1881 to 1861 dons the
mantle of Gladstone. The position of Chief Secretary of Ireland,
a position which the English themselves have called the tomb of
political reputations, is occupied by a literary jurist, who
probably hardly knew the names of the Irish counties when he was
presented to the electors of Bristol two years ago. Despite their
pledges and promises, despite the support of the Irish vote
during a quarter of a century, despite its enormous majority
(which is without precedent in the parliamentary history of
England), the English Liberal ministry introduces a measure of
devolution which does not go beyond the proposals made by the
imperialist Chamberlain in 1885, which the conservative press in
London openly refused to take seriously. The bill is passed on
the first reading with a majority of almost 300 votes, and while
the yellow journals break out in shudders of pretended anger, the
Lords consult each other to decide whether this wavering
scarecrow about to enter the lists is really worthy of their
sword.
  Probably the Lords will kill the measure, since this is their
trade, but if they are wise, they will hesitate to alienate the
sympathy of the Irish for constitutional agitation; especially
now that India and Egypt are in an uproar and the overseas
colonies are asking for an imperial federation. From their point
of view, it would not be advisable to provoke by an obstinate
veto the reaction of a people who, poor in everything else and
rich only in political ideas, have perfected the strategy of
obstructionism and made the word 'boycott' an international
war-cry.
  On the other hand, England has little to lose. The measure
(which is not the twentieth part of the Home Rule measure) gives
the Executive Council at Dublin no legislative power, no power to
impose or regulate taxes, no control over 39 of the 47 government
offices, including the police, the supreme court, and the
agrarian commission. In addition, the Unionist interests are
jealously safeguarded. The Liberal minister has been careful to
insert in the first line of his speech the fact that the English
electorate must disburse more than a half million pounds sterling
each year as the price of the measure; and, understanding their
countryman's intentions, the journalists and the Conservative
speakers have made good use of this statement, appealing in their
hostile comments to the most vulnerable part of the English
electorate -- their pocketbook. But neither the Liberal ministers
nor the journalists will explain to the English voters that this
expense is not a disbursement of English money, but rather a
partial settlement on account of England's debt to Ireland. Nor
will they cite the report of the English Royal Commission which
established the fact that Ireland was overtaxed 88 million francs
in comparison with her senior partner. Nor will they recall the
fact that the statesmen and scientists who inspected the vast
central swamp of Ireland asserted that the two spectres that sit
at every Irish fireplace, tuberculosis and insanity, deny all
that the English claim; and that the moral debt of the English
government to Ireland for not having reforested this pestiferous
swamp during an entire century amounts to 500 million francs .
  Now, even from a hasty study of the history of Home Rule, we
can make two deductions, for what they are worth. The first is
this: the most powerful weapons that England can use against
Ireland are no longer those of Conservatism, but those of
Liberalism and Vaticanism. Conservatism, though it may be
tyrannical, is a frankly and openly inimical doctrine. Its
position is logical; it does not want a rival island to arise
near Great Britain, or Irish factories to create competition for
those in England, or tobacco and wine again to be exported from
Ireland, or the great ports along the Irish coast to become enemy
naval bases under a native government or a foreign protectorate.
Its position is logical, as is that of the Irish separatists
which contradicts it point by point. It takes little intelligence
to understand that Gladstone has done Ireland greater damage than
Disraeli did, and that the most fervid enemy of the Irish
Catholics is the head of English Vaticanism, the Duke of Norfolk.
  The second deduction is even more obvious, and it is this: the
Irish parliamentary party has gone bankrupt. For twenty-seven
years it has talked and agitated. In that time it has collected
35 million francs from its supporters, and the fruit of its
agitation is that Irish taxes have gone up 88 million francs and
the Irish population has decreased a million. The representatives
themselves have improved their own lot, aside from small
discomforts like a few months in prison and some lengthy
sittings. From the sons of ordinary citizens, pedlars, and
lawyers without clients they have become well-paid syndics,
directors of factories and commercial houses, newspaper owners,
and large landholders. They have given proof of their altruism
only in 1891, when they sold their leader, Parnell, to the
pharisaical conscience of the English Dissenters without exacting
the thirty pieces of silver.
                              JAMES JOYCE
