
6.   Fortnightly Review  April 1, 1900


Ibsen's New Drama

  Twenty years have passed since Henrik Ibsen wrote <A Doll's
House>, thereby almost marking an epoch in the history of drama.
During those years his name has gone abroad through the length
and breadth of two continents, and has provoked more discussion
and criticism than that of any other living man. He has been
upheld as a religious reformer, a social reformer, a Semitic
lover of righteousness, and as a great dramatist. He has been
rigorously denounced as a meddlesome intruder, a defective
artist, an incomprehensible mystic, and, in the eloquent words of
a certain English critic, 'a muck-ferreting dog'. Through the
perplexities of such diverse criticism, the great genius of the
man is day by day coming out as a hero comes out amid the earthly
trials. The dissonant cries are fainter and more distant, the
random praises are rising in steadier and more choral chaunt.
Even to the uninterested bystander it must seem significant that
the interest attached to this Norwegian has never flagged for
over a quarter of a century. It may be questioned whether any man
has held so firm an empire over the thinking world in modern
times. Not Rousseau; not Emerson; not Carlyle; not any of those
giants of whom almost all have passed out of human ken. Ibsen's
power over two generations has been enhanced by his own
reticence. Seldom, if at all, has he condescended to join battle
with his enemies. It would appear as if the storm of fierce
debate rarely broke in upon his wonderful calm. The conflicting
voices have not influenced his work in the very smallest degree.
His output of dramas has been regulated by the utmost order, by a
clockwork routine, seldom found in the case of genius. Only once
he answered his assailants after their violent attack on
<Ghosts>. But from <The Wild Duck> to <John Gabriel Borkman>, his
dramas have appeared almost mechanically at intervals of two
years. One is apt to overlook the sustained energy which such a
plan of campaign demands; but even surprise at this must give way
to admiration at the gradual, irresistible advance of this
extraordinary man. Eleven plays, all dealing with modern life,
have been published. Here is the list: <A Doll's House>,
<Ghosts>, <An Enemy of the People>, <The Wild Duck>,
<Rosmersholm>, <The Lady from the Sea>, <Hedda Gabler>, <The
Master Builder>, <Little Eyolf>, <John Gabriel Borkman>, and
lastly -- his new drama, published at Copenhagen, December 19th,
1899 -- <When We Dead Awaken>. This play is already in process of
translation into almost a dozen different languages -- a fact
which speaks volumes for the power of its author. The drama is
written in prose, and is in three acts.
  To begin an account of a play of Ibsen's is surely no easy
matter. The subject is, in one way, so confined, and, in another
way, so vast. It is safe to predict that nine-tenths of the
notices of this play will open in some such way as the following:
'Arnold Rubek and his wife, Maja, have been married for four
years, at the beginning of the play. Their union is, however,
unhappy. Each is discontented with the other.' So far as this
goes, it is unimpeachable; but then it does not go very far. It
does not convey even the most shadowy notion of the relations
between Professor Rubek and his wife. It is a bald, clerkly
version of countless, indefinable complexities. It is as though
the history of a tragic life were to be written down rudely in
two columns, one for the pros and the other for the cons. It is
only saying what is literally true, to say that, in the three
acts of the drama, there has been stated all that is essential to
the drama. There is from first to last hardly a superfluous word
or phrase. Therefore, the play itself expresses its own ideas as
briefly and as concisely as they can be expressed in the dramatic
form. It is manifest, then, that a notice cannot give an adequate
notion of the drama. This is not the case with the common lot of
plays, to which the fullest justice may be meted out in a very
limited number of lines. They are for the most part reheated
dishes -- unoriginal compositions, cheerfully owlish as to heroic
insight, living only in their own candid claptrap -- in a word,
stagey. The most perfunctory curtness is their fittest meed. But
in dealing with the work of a man like Ibsen, the task set the
reviewer is truly great enough to sink all his courage. All he
can hope to do is to link some of the more salient points
together in such a way as to suggest rather than to indicate, the
intricacies of the plot. Ibsen has attained ere this to such
mastery over his art that, with apparently easy dialogue, he
presents his men and women passing through different soul-crises.
His analytic method is thus made use of to the fullest extent,
and into the comparatively short space of two days the life in
life of all his characters is compressed. For instance, though we
only see Solness during one night and up to the following
evening, we have in reality watched with bated breath the whole
course of his life up to the moment when Hilda Wangel enters his
house. So in the play under consideration, when we see Professor
Rubek first, he is sitting in a garden chair, reading his morning
paper, but by degrees the whole scroll of his life is unrolled
before us, and we have the pleasure not of hearing it read out to
us, but of reading it for ourselves, piecing the various parts,
and going closer to see wherever the writing on the parchment is
fainter or less legible.
  As I have said, when the play opens, Professor Rubek is sitting
in the gardens of a hotel, eating, or rather having finished, his
breakfast. In another chair, close beside him, is sitting Maja
Rubek, the Professor's wife. The scene is in Norway, a popular
health resort near the sea. Through the trees can be seen the
town harbour, and the fjord, with steamers plying over it, as it
stretches past headland and river-isle out to the sea. Rubek is a
famous sculptor, of middle age, and Maja, a woman still young,
whose bright eyes have just a shade of sadness in them. These two
continue reading their respective papers quietly in the peace of
the morning. All looks so idyllic to the careless eye. The lady
breaks the silence in a weary, petulant manner by complaining of
the deep peace that reigns about them. Arnold lays down his paper
with mild expostulation. Then they begin to converse of this
thing and that; first of the silence, then of the place and the
people, of the railway stations through which they passed the
previous night, with their sleepy porters and aimlessly shifting
lanterns. From this they proceed to talk of the changes in the
people, and of all that has grown up since they were married.
Then it is but a little further to the main trouble. In speaking
of their married life it speedily appears that the inner view of
their relations is hardly as ideal as the outward view might lead
one to expect. The depths of these two people are being slowly
stirred up. The leaven of prospective drama is gradually
discerned working amid the <fin-de-siecle> scene. The lady seems
a difficult little person. She complains of the idle promises
with which her husband had fed her aspirations.

  MAJA. You said you would take me up to a high mountain and show
me all the glory of the world.
  RUBEK {with a slight start}. Did I promise you that, too?

  In short, there is something untrue lying at the root of their
union. Meanwhile the guests of the hotel, who are taking the
baths, pass out of the hotel porch on the right, chatting and
laughing men and women. They are informally marshalled by the
inspector of the baths. This person is an unmistakable type of
the conventional official. He salutes Mr. and Mrs. Rubek,
enquiring how they slept. Rubek asks him if any of the guests
take their baths by night, as he has seen a white figure moving
in the park during the night. Maja scouts the notion, but the
inspector says that there is a strange lady, who has rented the
pavilion which is to the left, and who is staying there, with one
attendant -- a Sister of Mercy. As they are talking, the strange
lady and her companion pass slowly through the park and enter the
pavilion. The incident appears to affect Rubek, and Maja's
curiosity is aroused.

  MAJA {a little hurt and jarred}. Perhaps this lady has been one
of your models, Rubek ? Search your memory.
  RUBEK {looks cuttingly at her}. Model ?
  MAJA {with a provoking smile}. In your younger days, I mean.
You are said to have had such innumerable models -- long ago, of
course.
  RUBEK {in the same tone}. Oh, no, little Frau Maja. I have in
reality had only one single model. One and one only for
everything I have done.

  While this misunderstanding is finding outlet in the foregoing
conversation, the inspector, all at once, takes fright at some
person who is approaching. He attempts to escape into the hotel,
but the high-pitched voice of the person who is approaching
arrests him.

  ULFHEIM'S voice {heard outside}. Stop a moment, man. Devil take
it all, can't you stop? Why do you always scuttle away from me?

  With these words, uttered in strident tones, the second chief
actor enters on the scene. He is described as a great
bear-killer, thin, tall, of uncertain age, and muscular. He is
accompanied by his servant, Lars, and a couple of sporting dogs.
Lars does not speak a single word in the play. Ulfheim at present
dismisses him with a kick, and approaches Mr. and Mrs. Rubek. He
falls into conversation with them, for Rubek is known to him as
the celebrated sculptor. On sculpture this savage hunter offers
some original remarks.

  ULFHEIM ... We both work in a hard material, madam -- both your
husband and I. He struggles with his marble blocks, I daresay;
and I struggle with tense and quivering bear-sinews. And we both
of us win the fight in the end -- subdue and master our material.
We don't give in until we have got the better of it, though it
fight never so hard.
  RUBEK {deep in thought}. There's a great deal of truth in what
you say.

  This eccentric creature, perhaps by the force of his own
eccentricity, has begun to weave a spell of enchantment about
Maja. Each word that he utters tends to wrap the web of his
personality still closer about her. The black dress of the Sister
of Mercy causes him to grin sardonically. He speaks calmly of all
his near friends, whom he has dispatched out of the world.

  MAJA. And what did you do for your nearest friends?
  ULFHEIM. Shot them, of course.
  RUBEK {looking at him}. Shot them?
  MAJA {moving her chair back}. Shot them dead ?
  ULFHEIM {nods}. I never miss, madam.

  However, it turns out that by his nearest friends he means his
dogs, and the minds of his hearers are put somewhat more at ease.
During their conversation the Sister of Mercy has prepared a
slight repast for her mistress at one of the tables outside the
pavilion. The unsustaining qualities of the food excite Ulfheim's
merriment. He speaks with a lofty disparagement of such
effeminate diet. He is a realist in his appetite.

  ULFHEIM {rising}. Spoken like a woman of spirit, madam. Come
with me, then! They [his dogs] swallow whole, great, thumping
meat-bones -- gulp them up and then gulp them down again. Oh,
it's a regular treat to see them!

  On such half-gruesome, half-comic invitation Maja goes out with
him, leaving her husband in the company of the strange lady who
enters from the pavilion. Almost simultaneously the Professor and
the lady recognize each other. The lady has served Rubek as model
for the central figure in his famous masterpiece, 'The
Resurrection Day'. Having done her work for him, she had fled in
an unaccountable manner, leaving no traces behind her. Rubek and
she drift into familiar conversation. She asks him who is the
lady who has just gone out. He answers, with some hesitation,
that she is his wife. Then he asks if she is married. She replies
that she is married. He asks her where her husband is at present.

  RUBEK. And where is he now?
  IRENE. Oh, in a churchyard somewhere or other, with a fine,
handsome monument over him; and with a bullet rattling in his
skull.
  RUBEK. Did he kill himself?
  IRENE. Yes, he was good enough to take that off my hands.
  RUBEK. Do you not lament his loss, Irene?
  IRENE {not understanding}. Lament? What loss?
  RUBEK. Why, the loss of Herr von Satow, of course.
  IRENE. His name was not Satow.
  RUBEK. Was it not?
  IRENE. My second husband is called Satow. He is a Russian.
  RUBEK. And where is he?
  IRENE. Far away in the Ural Mountains. Among all his
gold-mines.
  RUBEK. So he lives there?
  IRENE {shrugs her shoulders}. Lives? Lives? In reality I have
killed him.
  RUBEK {starts}. Killed -- !
  IRENE. Killed him with a fine sharp dagger which I always have
with me in bed --

  Rubek begins to understand that there is some meaning hidden
beneath these strange words. He begins to think seriously on
himself, his art, and on her, passing in review the course of his
life since the creation of his masterpiece, 'The Resurrection
Day'. He sees that he has not fulfilled the promise of that work,
and comes to realize that there is something lacking in his life.
He asks Irene how she has lived since they last saw each other.
Irene's answer to his query is of great importance, for it
strikes the key note of the entire play.

  IRENE {rises slowly from her chair and says quiveringly}. I was
dead for many years. They came and bound me -- lacing my arms
together at my back. Then they lowered me into a grave-vault,
with iron bars before the loophole. And with padded walls, so
that no one on the earth above could hear the grave-shrieks.

  In Irene's allusion to her position as model for the great
picture, Ibsen gives further proof of his extraordinary knowledge
of women. No other man could have so subtly expressed the nature
of the relations between the sculptor and his model, had he even
dreamt of them.

  IRENE. I exposed myself wholly and unreservedly to your gaze
{more softly} and never once did you touch me ....

                    *     *      *      *
  RUBEK {looks impressively at her}. I was an artist, Irene.
  IRENE {darkly}. That is just it. That is just it.

  Thinking deeper and deeper on himself and on his former
attitude towards this woman, it strikes him yet more forcibly
that there are great gulfs set between his art and his life, and
that even in his art his skill and genius are far from perfect.
Since Irene left him he has done nothing but paint portrait busts
of townsfolk. Finally, some kind of resolution is enkindled in
him, a resolution to repair his botching, for he does not
altogether despair of that. There is just a reminder of the
will-glorification of Brand in the lines that follow.

  RUBEK {struggling with himself, uncertainly}. If we could, oh,
if only we could ....
  IRENE. Why can we not do what we will?

  In fine, the two agree in deeming their present state
insufferable. It appears plain to her that Rubek lies under a
heavy obligation to her, and with their recognition of this, and
the entrance of Maja, fresh from the enchantment of Ulfheim, the
first act closes.

  RUBEK. When did you begin to seek for me, Irene?
  IRENE {with a touch of jesting bitterness}. From the time when
I realized that I had given away to you something rather
indispensable. Something one ought never to part with.
  RUBEK (bowing his head). Yes, that is bitterly true. You gave
me three or four years of your youth.
  IRENE. More, more than that I gave you -- spendthrift as I then
was.
  RUBEK. Yes, you were prodigal, Irene. You gave me all your
naked loveliness --
  IRENE. To gaze upon --
  RUBEK. And to glorify ....

                           *      *      *      *

  IRENE. But you have forgotten the most precious gift.
  RUBEK. The most precious . . . what gift was that?
  IRENE. I gave you my young living soul. And that gift left me
empty within -- soulless {looks at him with a fixed stare}. It
was that I died of, Arnold.

  It is evident, even from this mutilated account, that the first
act is a masterly one. With no perceptible effort the drama
rises, with n methodic natural ease it develops. The trim garden
of the nineteenth-century hotel is slowly made the scene of a
gradually growing dramatic struggle. Interest has been roused in
each of the characters, sufficient to carry the mind into the
succeeding act. The situation is not stupidly explained, but the
action has set in, and at the close the play has reached a
definite stage of progression.
  The second act takes place close to a sanatorium on the
mountains. A cascade leaps from a rock and flows in steady stream
to the right. On the bank some children are playing, laughing and
shouting. The time is evening. Rubek is discovered lying on a
mound to the left. Maja enters shortly, equipped for
hill-climbing. Helping herself with her stick across the stream,
she calls out to Rubek and approaches him. He asks how she and
her companion are amusing themselves, and questions her as to
their hunting. An exquisitely humorous touch enlivens their talk.
Rubek asks if they intend hunting the bear near the surrounding
locality. She replies with a grand superiority.

  MAJA. You don't suppose that bears are to be found in the naked
mountains, do you?

  The next topic is the uncouth Ulfheim. Maja admires him because
he is so ugly--then turns abruptly to her husband saying,
pensively, that he also is ugly. The accused pleads his age. 

  RUBEK {shrugging his shoulders}. One grows old. One grows old,
Frau Maja!

  This semi-serious banter leads them on to graver matters. Maja
lies at length in the soft heather, and rails gently at the
Professor. For the mysteries and claims of art she has a somewhat
comical disregard.

  MAJA {with a somewhat scornful laugh}. Yes, you are always,
always an artist.

and again--

  MAJA.... Your tendency is to keep yourself to yourself and --
think your own thoughts. And, of course, I can't talk properly to
you about your affairs. I know nothing about Art and that sort of
thing. {With an impatient gesture.} And care very little either,
for that matter.

  She rallies him on the subject of the strange lady, and hints
maliciously at the understanding between them. Rubek says that he
was only an artist and that she was the source of his
inspiration. He confesses that the five years of his married life
have been years of intellectual famine for him. He has viewed in
their true light his own feelings towards his art.

  RUBEK {smiling}. But that was not precisely what I had in my
mind.
  MAJA. What then?
  RUBEK {again serious}. It was this -- that all the talk about
the artist's vocation and the artist's mission, and so forth,
began to strike me as being very empty and hollow and meaningless
at bottom.
  MAJA. Then what would you put in its place?
  RUBEK. Life, Maja.

  The all-important question of their mutual happiness is touched
upon, and after a brisk discussion a tacit agreement to separate
is effected. When matters are in this happy condition Irene is
descried coming across the heath. She is surrounded by the
sportive children and stays awhile among them. Maja jumps up from
the grass and goes to her, saying, enigmatically, that her
husband requires assistance to 'open a precious casket'. Irene
bows and goes towards Rubek, and Maja goes joyfully to seek her
hunter. The interview which follows is certainly remarkable, even
from a stagey point of view. It constitutes, practically, the
substance of the second act, and is of absorbing interest. At the
same time it must be added that such a scene would tax the powers
of the mimes producing it. Nothing short of a complete
realization of the two <roles> would represent the complex ideas
involved in the conversation. When we reflect how few stage
artists would have either the intelligence to attempt it or the
powers to execute it, we behold a pitiful revelation.
  In the interview of these two people on the heath, the whole
tenors of their lives are outlined with bold steady strokes. From
the first exchange of introductory words each phrase tells a
chapter of experiences. Irene alludes to the dark shadow of the
Sister of Mercy which follows her everywhere, as the shadow of
Arnold's unquiet conscience follows him. When he has
half-involuntarily confessed so much, one of the great barriers
between them is broken down. Their trust in each other is, to
some extent, renewed, and they revert to their past acquaintance.
Irene speaks openly of her feelings, of her hate for the
sculptor.

  IRENE {again vehemently}. Yes, for you -- for the artist who
had so lightly and carelessly taken a warm-blooded body, a young
human life, and worn the soul out of it -- because you needed it
for a work of art.

  Rubek's transgression has indeed been great. Not merely has he
possessed himself of her soul, but he has withheld from its
rightful throne the child of her soul. By her child Irene means
the statue. To her it seems that this statue is, in a very true
and very real sense, born of her. Each day as she saw it grow to
its full growth under the hand of the skilful moulder, her inner
sense of motherhood for it, of right over it, of love towards it,
had become stronger and more confirmed.

  IRENE {changing to a tone full of warmth and feeling}. But that
statue in the wet, living clay, that I loved -- as it rose up, a
vital human creature out of these raw, shapeless masses -- for
that was our creation, our child. Mine and yours.

  It is, in reality, because of her strong feelings that she has
kept aloof from Rubek for five years. But when she hears now of
what he has done to the child -- her child -- all her powerful
nature rises up against him in resentment. Rubek, in a mental
agony, endeavours to explain, while she listens like a tigress
whose cub has been wrested from her by a thief.

  RUBEK. I was young then -- with no experience of life. The
Resurrection, I thought, would be most beautifully and
exquisitely figured as a young unsullied woman -- with none of a
life's experience -- awakening to light and glory without having
to put away from her anything ugly and impure.

  With larger experience of life he has found it necessary to
alter his ideal somewhat, he has made her child no longer a
principal, but an intermediary figure. Rubek, turning towards
her, sees her just about to stab him. In a fever of terror and
thought he rushes into his own defence, pleading madly for the
errors he has done. It seems to Irene that he is endeavouring to
render his sin poetical, that he is penitent but in a luxury of
dolour. The thought that she has given up herself, her whole
life, at the bidding of his false art, rankles in her heart with
a terrible persistence. She cries out against herself, not
loudly, but in deep sorrow.

  IRENE {with apparent self-control}. I should have borne
children into the world -- many children -- real children -- not
such children as are hidden away in grave-vaults. That was my
vocation. I ought never to have served you -- poet.

  Rubek, in poetic absorption, has no reply, he is musing on the
old, happy days. Their dead joys solace him. But Irene is
thinking of a certain phrase of his which he had spoken
unwittingly. He had declared that he owed her thanks for her
assistance in his work. This has been, he had said, a truly
blessed episode in my life. Rubek's tortured mind cannot bear any
more reproaches, too many are heaped upon it already. He begins
throwing flowers on the stream, as they used in those bygone days
on the lake of Taunitz. He recalls to her the time when they made
a boat of leaves, and yoked a white swan to it, in imitation of
the boat of Lohengrin. Even here in their sport there lies a
hidden meaning.

  IRENE. You said I was the swan that drew your boat.
  RUBEK. Did I say so? Yes, I daresay I did {absorbed in the
game}. Just see how the sea-gulls are swimming down the stream!
  IRENE {laughing}. And all your ships have run ashore.
  RUBEK {throwing more leaves into the brook}. I have ships
enough in reserve.

  While they are playing aimlessly, in a kind of childish
despair, Ulfheim and Maja appear across the heath. These two are
going to seek adventures on the high tablelands. Maja sings out
to her husband a little song which she has composed in her joyful
mood. With a sardonic laugh Ulfheim bids Rubek good-night and
disappears with his companion up the mountain. All at once Irene
and Rubek leap to the same thought. But at that moment the gloomy
figure of the Sister of Mercy is seen in the twilight, with her
leaden eyes looking at them both. Irene breaks from him, but
promises to meet him that night on the heath.

  RUBEK. And you will come, Irene?
  IRENE. Yes, certainly I will come. Wait for me here.
  RUBEK {repeats dreamily}. Summer night on the upland. With you.
With you. {His eyes meet hers.} Oh, Irene, that might have been
our life. And that we have forfeited, we two.
  IRENE. We see the irretrievable only when {breaks short off}.
  RUBEK {looks inquiringly at her}. When? . . .
  IRENE. When we dead awaken.

  The third act takes place on a wide plateau, high up on the
hills. The ground is rent with yawning clefts. Looking to the
right, one sees the range of the summits half-hidden in the
moving mists. On the left stands an old, dismantled hut. It is in
the early morning, when the skies are the colour of pearl. The
day is beginning to break. Maja and Ulfheim come down to the
plateau. Their feelings are sufficiently explained by the opening
words.

  MAJA {trying to tear herself loose}. Let me go! I et me go, I
say!
  ULFHEIM. Come, come! are you going to bite now? You're as
snappish as a wolf.

  When Ulfheim will not cease his annoyances, Maja threatens to
run over the crest of the neighbouring ridge. Ulfheim points out
that she will dash herself to pieces. He has wisely sent Lars
away after the hounds, that he may be uninterrupted. Lars, he
says, may be trusted not to find the dogs too soon.

  MAJA {looking angrily at him}. No, I daresay not.
  ULFHEIM {catching at her arm}. For Lars -- he knows my -- my
methods of sport, you see.

  Maja, with enforced self-possession, tells him frankly what she
thinks of him. Her uncomplimentary observations please the
bearhunter very much. Maja requires all her tact to keep him in
order. When she talks of going back to the hotel, he gallantly
offers to carry her on his shoulders, for which suggestion he is
promptly snubbed. The two are playing as a cat and a bird play.
Out of their skirmish one speech of Ulfheim's rises suddenly to
arrest attention, as it throws some light on his former life.

  ULFHEIM {with suppressed exasperation}. I once took a young
girl -- lifted her up from the mire of the streets, and carried
her in my arms. Next my heart I carried her. So I would have
borne her all through life, lest haply she should dash her foot
against a stone .... {with a growling laugh.} And do you know
what I got for my reward?
  MAJA. No. What did you get?
  ULFHEIM {looks at her, smiles and nods}. I got the horns! The
horns that you can see so plainly. Is not that a comical story,
madam bear-murderess?

  As an exchange of confidence, Maja tells him her life in
summary -- and chiefly her married life with Professor Rubek. As
a result, these two uncertain souls feel attracted to each other,
and Ulfheim states his case in the following characteristic
manner:

  ULFHEIM. Should not we two tack our poor shreds of life
together ?

  Maja, satisfied that in their vows there will be no promise on
his part to show her all the splendours of the earth, or to fill
her dwelling-place with art, gives a half-consent by allowing him
to carry her down the slope. As they are about to go, Rubek and
Irene, who have also spent the night on the heath, approach the
same plateau. When Ulfheim asks Rubek if he and madame have
ascended by the same pathway, Rubek answers significantly.

  RUBEK. Yes, of course {With a glance at MAJA}. Henceforth the
strange lady and I do not intend our ways to part.

  While the musketry of their wit is at work, the elements seem
to feel that there is a mighty problem to be solved then and
there, and that a great drama is swiftly drawing to a close. The
smaller figures of Maja and Ulfheim are grown still smaller in
the dawn of the tempest. Their lots are decided in comparative
quiet, and we cease to take much interest in them. But the other
two hold our gaze, as they stand up silently on the fjaell,
engrossing central figures of boundless, human interest. On a
sudden, Ulfheim raises his hand impressively towards the heights.

  ULFHEIM. But don't you see that the storm is upon us? Don't you
hear the blasts of wind ?
  RUBEK {listening}. They sound like the prelude to the
Resurrection Day.

                    *       *       *         *

  MAJA {drawing ULFHEIM away}. Let us make haste and get down.

  As he cannot take more than one person at a time, Ulfheim
promises to send aid for Rubek and Irene, and, seizing Maja in
his arms, clambers rapidly but warily down the path. On the
desolate mountain plateau, in the growing light, the man and the
woman are left together -- no longer the artist and his model.
And the shadow of a great change is stalking close in the morning
silence. Then Irene tells Arnold that she will not go back among
the men and women she has left; she will not be rescued. She
tells him also, for now she may tell all, how she had been
tempted to kill him in frenzy when he spoke of their connection
as an episode of his life.

  RUBEK {darkly}. And why did you hold your hand?
  IRENE. Because it flashed upon me with a sudden horror that you
were dead already -- long ago.

  But, says Rubek, our love is not dead in us, it is active,
fervent and strong.

  IRENE. The love that belongs to the life of earth -- the
beautiful, miraculous life of earth -- the inscrutable life of
earth -- that is dead in both of us.
  There are, moreover, the difficulties of their former lives.
Even here, at the sublimest part of his play, Ibsen is master of
himself and his facts. His genius as an artist faces a]l, shirks
nothing. At the close of The Master Builder, the greatest touch
of all was the horrifying exclamation of one without, 'O! the
head is all crushed in.' A lesser artist would have cast a
spiritual glamour over the tragedy of Bygmester Solness. In like
manner here Irene objects that she has exposed herself as a nude
before the vulgar gaze, that Society has cast her out, that all
is too late. But Rubek cares for such considerations no more. He
flings them all to the wind and decides.

  RUBEK {throwing his arms violently around her}. Then let two of
the dead -- us two -- for once live life to its uttermost, before
we go down to our graves again.
  IRENE {with a shriek}. Arnold!
  RUBEK. But not here in the half-darkness. Not here with this
hideous dank shroud flapping around us!
  IRENE {carried away by passion}. No, no -- up in the light and
in all the glittering glory! Up to the Peak of Promise!
  RUBEK. There we will hold our marriage-feast, Irene -- oh! my
beloved!
  IRENE {proudly}. The sun may freely look on us, Arnold.
  RUBEK. All the powers of light may freely look on us -- and all
the powers of darkness too {seizes her hand} -- will you then
follow me, oh my grace-given bride!
  IRENE {as though transfigured}. I follow you, freely and
gladly, my lord and master!
  RUBEK {drawing her along with him}. We must first pass through
the mists, Irene, and then --
  IRENE. Yes, through all the mists, and then right up to the
summit of the tower that shines in the sunrise.

     {The mist-clouds close in over the scene. RUBEK and
   IRENE, hand in hand, climb up over the snowfield to the
   right and soon disappear among the lower clouds. Keen
   storm-gusts hurtle and whistle through the air.}
     {The SISTER OF MERCY appears upon the rubble-slope to the
   left. She stops and looks around silently and searchingly.}
     {MAJA can be heard singing triumphantly far in the depths
   below.}

  MAJA. I am free! I am free! I am free!
        No more life in the prison for me!
        I am free as a bird! I am free!

     {Suddenly a sound like thunder is heard from high up on
   the snowfield, which glides and whirls downwards with
   rushing speed. RUBEK and IRENE can be dimly discerned as
   they are whirled along with the masses of snow and buried
   in them.}

  THE SISTER OF MERCY {gives a shriek, stretches out her arms
towards them, and cries}, Irene! {Stands silent a moment, then
makes the sign of the cross before her in the air, and says}, Pax
Vobiscum!

     {MAJA'S triumphant song sounds from still further down
   below.}

  Such is the plot, in a crude and incoherent way, of this new
drama. Ibsen's plays do not depend for their interest on the
action, or on the incidents. Even the characters, faultlessly
drawn though they be, are not the first thing in his plays. But
the naked drama -- either the perception of a great truth, or the
opening up of a great question, or a great conflict which is
almost independent of the conflicting actors, and has been and is
of far-reaching importance -- this is what primarily rivets our
attention. Ibsen has chosen the average lives in their
uncompromising truth for the groundwork of all his later plays.
He has abandoned the verse form, and has never sought to
embellish his work after the conventional fashion. Even when his
dramatic theme reached its zenith he has not sought to trick it
out in gawds or tawdriness. How easy it would have been to have
written <An Enemy of the People> on a speciously loftier level --
to have replaced the <bourgeois> by the legitimate hero! Critics
might then have extolled as grand what they have so often
condemned as banal. But the surroundings are nothing to Ibsen.
The play is the thing. By the force of his genius, and the
indisputable skill which he brings to all his efforts, Ibsen has,
for many years, engrossed the attention of the civilized world.
Many years more, however, must pass before he will enter his
kingdom in jubilation, although, as he stands to-day, all has
been done on his part to ensure his own worthiness to enter
therein. I do not propose here to examine into every detail of
dramaturgy connected with this play, but merely to outline the
characterization.
  In his characters Ibsen does not repeat himself. In this drama
-- the last of a long catalogue -- he has drawn and
differentiated with his customary skill. What a novel creation is
Ulfheim! Surely the hand which has drawn him has not yet lost her
cunning Ulflleim is, I think, the newest character in the play.
He is a kind of surprise-packet. It is as a result of his novelty
that he seems to leap, at first mention, into bodily form. He is
superbly wild, primitively impressive. His fierce eyes roll and
glare as those of Yegof or Herne. As for Lars, we may dismiss
him, for he never opens his mouth. The Sister of Mercy speaks
only once in the play, but then with good effect. In silence she
follows Irene like a retribution, a voiceless shadow with her own
symbolic majesty.
  Irene, too, is worthy of her place in the gallery of her
compeers. Ibsen's knowledge of humanity is nowhere more obvious
than in his portrayal of women. He amazes one by his painful
introspection; he seems to know them better than they know
themselves.l Indeed, if one may say so of an eminently virile
man, there is a curious admixture of the woman in his nature. His
marvellous accuracy, his faint traces of femininity, his delicacy
of swift touch, are perhaps attributable to this admixture. But
that he knows women is an incontrovertible fact. He appears to
have sounded them to almost unfathomable depths. Beside his
portraits the psychological studies of Hardy and Turgenieff, or
the exhaustive elaborations of Meredith, seem no more than
sciolism. With a deft stroke, in a phrase, in a word, he does
what costs them chapters, and does it better. Irene, then, has to
face great comparison; but it must be acknowledged that she comes
forth of it bravely. Although Ibsen's women are uniformly true,
they, of course, present themselves in various lights. Thus Gina
Ekdal is, before all else, a comic figure, and Hedda Gabler a
tragic one -- if such old-world terms may be employed without
incongruity. But Irene cannot be so readily classified; the very
aloofness from passion, which is not separable from her, forbids
classification. She interests us strangely -- magnetically,
because of her inner power of character However perfect Ibsen's
former creations may be, it is questionable whether any of his
women reach to the depth of soul of Irene. She holds our gaze for
the sheer force of her intellectual capacity. She is, moreover,
an intensely spiritual creation -- in the truest and widest sense
of that. At times she is liable to get beyond us, to soar above
us, as she does with Rubek. It will be considered by some as a
blemish that she -- a woman of fine spirituality -- is made an
artist's model, and some may even regret that such an episode
mars the harmony of the drama. I cannot altogether see the force
of this contention; it seems pure irrelevancy. But whatever may
be thought of the fact, there is small room for complaint as to
the handling of it. Ibsen treats it, as indeed he treats all
things, with large insight, artistic restraint, and sympathy. He
sees it steadily and whole, as from a great height, with perfect
vision and an angelic dispassionateness, with the sight of one
who may look on the sun with open eyes. Ibsen is different from
the clever purveyor.
  Maja fulfills a certain technical function in the play, apart
from her individual character. Into the sustained tension she
comes as a relief. Her airy freshness is as a breath of keen air.
The sense of free, almost flamboyant, life, which is her chief
note, counter-balances the austerity of Irene and the dullness of
Rubek. Maja has practically the same effect on this play, as
Hilda Wangel has on <The Master Builder>. But she does not
capture our sympathy so much as Nora Helmer. She is not meant to
capture it.
  Rubek himself is the chief figure in this drama, and, strangely
enough, the most conventional. Certainly, when contrasted with
his Napoleonic predecessor, John Gabriel Borkman, he is a mere
shadow. It must be borne in mind, however, that Borkman is alive,
actively, energetically, restlessly alive, all through the play
to the end, when he dies; whereas Arnold Rubek is dead, almost
hopelessly dead, until the end, when he comes to life.
Notwithstanding this, he is supremely interesting, not because of
himself, but because of his dramatic significance. Ibsen's drama,
as I have said, is wholly independent of his characters. They may
be bores, but the drama in which they live and move is invariably
powerful. Not that Rubek is a bore by any means! He is infinitely
more interesting in himself than Torvald Helmer or Tesman, both
of whom possess certain strongly-marl;ed characteristics. Arnold
Rubek is, on the other hand, not intended to be a genius, as
perhaps Eljert Lovborg is. Had he been a genius like Eljert he
would have understood in a truer way the value of his life.l But,
as we are to suppose, the facts that he is devoted to his art and
that he has attained to a degree of mastery in it -- mastery of
hand linked with limitation of thought -- tell us that there may
be lying dormant in him a capacity for greater life, which may be
exercised when he, a dead man, shall have risen from among the
dead.
  The only character whom I have neglected is the inspector of
the baths, and I hasten to do him tardy, but scant, justice. He
is neither more nor less than the average inspector of baths. But
he is that.
  So much for the characterization, which is at all times
profound and interesting. But apart from the characters in the
play, there are some noteworthy points in the frequent and
extensive side- issues of the line of thought. The most salient
of these is what seems, at first sight, nothing more than an
accidental scenic feature. I allude to the environment of the
drama. One cannot but observe in Ibsen's later work a tendency to
get out of closed rooms. Since <Hedda Gabler> this tendency is
most marked. The last act of <The Master Builder> and the last
act of <John Gabriel Borkman> take place in the open air. But in
this play the three acts are <al fresco>. To give heed to such
details as these in the drama may be deemed ultra-Boswellian
fanaticism. As a matter of fact it is what is barely due to the
work of a great artist. And this feature, which is so prominent,
does not seem to me altogether without its significance.
  Again, there has not been lacking in the last few social dramas
a fine pity for men -- a note nowhere audible in the
uncompromising rigour of the early eighties. Thus in the
conversion of Rubek's views as to the girl-figure in his
masterpiece, 'The Resurrection Day', there is involved an
all-embracing philosophy, a deep sympathy with the cross-purposes
and contradictions of life, as they may be reconcilable with a
hopeful awakening -- when the manifold travail of our poor
humanity may have a glorious issue. As to the drama itself, it is
doubtful if any good purpose can be served by attempting to
criticize it. Many things would tend to prove this. Henrik Ibsen
is one of the world's great men before whom criticism can make
but feeble show. Appreciation, hearkening is the only true
criticism. Further, that species of criticism which calls itself
dramatic criticism is a needless adjunct to his plays. When the
art of a dramatist is perfect the critic is superfluous. Life is
not to be criticized, but to be faced and lived. Again, if any
plays demand a stage they are the plays of Ibsen. Not merely is
this so because his plays have so much in common with the plays
of other men that they were not written to cumber the shelves of
a library, but because they are so packed with thought. At some
chance expression the mind is tortured with some question, and in
a flash long reaches of life are opened up in vista, yet the
vision is momentary unless we stay to ponder on it. It is just to
prevent excessive pondering that Ibsen requires to be acted.
Finally, it is foolish to expect that a problem, which has
occupied Ibsen for nearly three years, will unroll smoothly
before our eyes on a first or second reading. So it is better to
leave the drama to plead for itself. But this at least is clear,
that in this play Ibsen has given us nearly the very best of
himself. The action is neither hindered by many complexities, as
in <The Pillars of Society>, nor harrowing in its simplicity, as
in <Ghosts>. We have whimsicality, bordering on extravagance, in
the wild Ulfheim, and subtle humour in the sly contempt which
Rubek and Maj a entertain for each other. But Ibsen has striven
to let the drama have perfectly free action. So he has not
bestowed his wonted pains on the minor characters. In many of his
plays these minor characters are matchless creations. Witness
Jacob Engstrand, Tonnesen, and the demonic Molvik! But in this
play the minor characters are not allowed to divert our
attention.
  On the whole, <When We Dead Awaken> may rank with the greatest
of the author's work -- if, indeed, it be not the greatest. It is
described as the last of the series, which began with <A Doll's
House> -- a grand epilogue to its ten predecessors. Than these
dramas, excellent alike in dramaturgic skill, characterization,
and supreme interest, the long roll of drama, ancient or modern,
has few things better to show.
                           JAMES A. JOYCE
