
38.   Il Piccolo della Sera,   September 16, 1907


Ireland at the Bar

  Several years ago a sensational trial was held in Ireland. In a
lonely place in a western province, called Maamtrasna, a murder
was committed. Four or five townsmen, all belonging to the
ancient tribe of the Joyces, were arrested. The oldest of them,
the seventy year old Myles Joyce, was the prime suspect. Public
opinion at the time thought him innocent and today considers him
a martyr. Neither the old man nor the others accused knew
English. The court had to resort to the services of an
interpreter. The questioning, conducted through the interpreter,
was at times comic and at times tragic. On one side was the
excessively ceremonious interpreter, on the other the patriarch
of a miserable tribe unused to civilized customs, who seemed
stupefied by all the judicial ceremony. The magistrate said:
  'Ask the accused if he saw the lady that night.' The question
was referred to him in Irish, and the old man broke out into an
involved explanation, gesticulating, appealing to the others
accused and to heaven. Then he quieted down, worn out by his
effort, and the interpreter turned to the magistrate and said:
  'He says no, "your worship".'
  'Ask him if he was in that neighbourhood at that hour.' The old
man again began to talk, to protest, to shout, almost beside
himself with the anguish of being unable to understand or to make
himself understood, weeping in anger and terror. And the
interpreter, again, dryly:
  'He says no, "your worship".'
  When the questioning was over, the guilt of the poor old man
was declared proved, and he was remanded to a superior court
which condemned him to the noose. On the day the sentence was
executed, the square in front of the prison was jammed full of
kneeling people shouting prayers in Irish for the repose of Myles
Joyce's soul. The story was told that the executioner, unable to
make the victim understand him, kicked at the miserable man's
head in anger to shove it into the noose.
  The figure of this dumbfounded old man, a remnant of a
civilization not ours, deaf and dumb before his judge, is a
symbol of the Irish nation at the bar of public opinion. Like
him, she is unable to appeal to the modern conscience of England
and other countries. The English journalists act as interpreters
between Ireland and the English electorate, which gives them ear
from time to time and ends up being vexed by the endless
complaints of the Nationalist representatives who have entered
her House, as she believes, to disrupt its order and extort
money. Abroad there is no talk of Ireland except when uprisings
break out, like those which made the telegraph office hop these
last few days. Skimming over the dispatches from London (which,
though they lack pungency, have something of the laconic quality
of the interpreter mentioned above), the public conceives of the
Irish as highwaymen with distorted faces, roaming the night with
the object of taking the hide of every Unionist. And by the real
sovereign of Ireland, the Pope, such news is received like so
many dogs in church. Already weakened by their long journey, the
cries are nearly spent when they arrive at the bronze door. The
messengers of the people who never in the past have renounced the
Holy See, the only Catholic people to whom faith also means the
exercise of faith, are rejected in favour of messengers of a
monarch, descended from apostates, who solemnly apostasized
himself on the day of his coronation, declaring in the presence
of his nobles and commons that the rites of the Roman Catholic
Church are 'superstition and idolatry'.

                *      *      *      *

  There are twenty million Irishmen scattered all over the world.
The Emerald Isle contains only a small part of them. But,
reflecting that, while England makes the Irish question the
centre of all her internal politics she proceeds with a wealth of
good judgment in quickly disposing of the more complex questions
of colonial politics, the observer can do no less than ask
himself why St. George's Channel makes an abyss deeper than the
ocean between Ireland and her proud dominator. In fact, the Irish
question is not solved even today, after six centuries of armed
occupation and more than a hundred years of English legislation,
which has reduced the population of the unhappy island from eight
to four million, quadrupled the taxes, and twisted the agrarian
problem into many more knots.
  In truth there is no problem more snarled than this one. The
Irish themselves understand little about it, the English even
less. For other people it is a black plague. But on the other
hand the Irish know that it is the cause of all their sufferings,
and therefore they often adopt violent methods of solution. For
example, twenty- eight years ago, seeing themselves reduced to
misery by the brutalities of the large landholders, they refused
to pay their land rents and obtained from Gladstone remedies and
reforms. Today, seeing pastures full of well fed cattle while an
eighth of the population lacks means of subsistence, they drive
the cattle from the farms. In irritation, the Liberal government
arranges to refurbish the coercive tactics of the Conservatives,
and for several weeks the London press dedicates innumerable
articles to the agrarian crisis,which, it says, is very serious.
It publishes alarming news of agrarian revolts, which is then
reproduced by journalists abroad.
  I do not propose to make an exegesis of the Irish agrarian
question nor to relate what goes on behind the scene in the two
faced politics of the government. But I think it useful to make a
modest correction of facts. Anyone who has read the telegrams
launched from London is sure that Ireland is undergoing a period
of unusual crime. An erroneous judgment, very erroneous. There is
less crime in Ireland than in any other country in Europe. In
Ireland there is no organized underworld. When one of those
events which the Parisian journalists, with atrocious irony, call
'red idylls' occurs, the whole country is shaken by it. It is
true that in recent months there were two violent deaths in
Ireland, but at the hands of British troops in Belfast, where the
soldiers fired without warning on an unarmed crowd and killed a
man and woman. There were attacks on cattle; but not even these
were in Ireland, where the crowd was content to open the stalls
and chase the cattle through several miles of streets, but at
Great Wyrley in England, where for six years bestial, maddened
criminals have ravaged the cattle to such an extent that the
English companies will no longer insure them. Five years ago an
innocent man, now at liberty, was condemned to forced labour to
appease public indignation. But even while he was ill prison the
crimes continued. And last week two horses were found dead with
the usual slashes in their lower abdomen and their bowels
scattered in the grass.
                                     JAMES JOYCE.
