
34.   Essay   1907


Ireland, Island of Saints and Sages

  Nations have their ego, just like individuals. The case of a
people who like to attribute to themselves qualities and glories
foreign to other people has not been entirely unknown in history,
from the time of our ancestors, who called themselves Aryans and
nobles, or that of the Greeks, w ho called all those who lived
outside the sacrosanct land of Hellas barbarians. The Irish, with
a pride that is perhaps less easy to explain, love to refer to
their country as the island of saints and sages.
  This exalted title was not invented yesterday or the day
before. It goes back to the most ancient times, when the island
was a true focus cf sanctity and intellect, spreading throughout
the continent a culture and a vitalizing energy. It would be easy
to make a list of the Irishmen who carried the torch of knowledge
from country to country as pilgrims and hermits, as scholars and
wisemen. Their traces are still seen today in abandoned altars,
in traditions and legends where even the name of the hero is
scarcely recognizable, or in poetic allusions, such as the
passage in Dante's <Inferno> where his mentor points to one of
the Celtic magicians tormented by infernal pains and says:

         Quel'altro, che ne' fianchi e cosi poco,
         Michele Scotto fu, che veramente
         Delle magiche frode seppe il gioco.

  In truth, it would take the learning and patience of a
leisurely Bollandist to relate the acts of these saints and
sages. We at least remember the notorious opponent of St. Thomas,
John Duns Scotus (called the Subtle Doctor to distinguish him
from St. Thomas, the Angelic Doctor, and from Bonaventura, the
Seraphic Doctor) who was the militant champion of the doctrine of
the Immaculate Conception, and, as the chronicles of that period
tell us, an unbeatable dialectician. It seems undeniable that
Ireland at that time was an immense seminary, where scholars
gathered from the different countries of Europe, so great was its
renown for mastery of spiritual matters. Although assertions of
this kind must be taken with great reservations, it is more than
likely (in view of the religious fervour that still prevails in
Ireland, of which you, who have been nourished on the food of
scepticism in recent years, can hardly form a correct idea) that
this glorious past is not a fiction based on the spirit of
self-glorification.
  If you really wish to be convinced, there are always the dusty
archives of the Germans. Ferrero now tells us that the
discoveries of these good professors of Germany, so far as they
deal with the ancient history of the Roman republic and the Roman
empire, are wrong from the beginning -- almost completely wrong.
It may be so. But, whether or not this is so, no one can deny
that, just as these learned Germans were the first to present
Shakespeare as a poet of world significance to the warped eyes of
his compatriots (who up to that time had considered William a
figure of secondary importance, a fine fellow with a pleasant
vein of lyric poetry, but perhaps too fond of English beer),
these very Germans were the only ones in Europe to concern
themselves with Celtic languages and the history of the five
Celtic nations. The only Irish grammars and dictionaries that
existed in Europe up until a few years ago, when the Gaelic
League was founded in Dublin, were the works of Germans.
  The Irish language, although of the Indo-European family,
differs from English almost as much as the language spoken in
Rome differs from that spoken in Teheran. It has an alphabet of
special characters, and a history almost three thousand years
old. Ten years ago, it was spoken only by the peasants in the
western provinces on the coast of the Atlantic and a few in the
south, and on the little islands that stand like pickets of the
vanguard of Europe, on the front of the eastern hemisphere. Now
the Gaelic League has revived its use. Every Irish newspaper,
with the exception of the Unionist organs, has at least one
special headline printed in Irish. The correspondence of the
principal cities is written in Irish, the Irish language is
taught in most of the primary and secondary schools, and, in the
universities, it has been set on a level with the other modern
languages, such as French, German, Italian, and Spanish. In
Dublin, the names of the streets are printed in both languages.
The League organizes concerts, debates, and socials at which the
speaker of <beurla> (that is, English) feels like a fish out of
water, confused in the midst of a crowd that chatters in a harsh
and guttural tongue. In the streets, you often see groups of
young people pass by speaking Irish, perhaps a little more
emphatically than is necessary. The members of the League write
to each other in Irish, and often the poor postman, unable to
read the address, must turn to his superior to untie the knot.
  This language is oriental in origin, and has been identified by
many philologists with the ancient language of the Phoenicians,
the originators of trade and navigation, according to historians.
This adventurous people, who had a monopoly of the sea,
established in Ireland a civilization that had decayed and almost
disappeared before the first Greek historian took his pen in
hand. It jealously preserved the secrets of its knowledge, and
the first mention of the island of Ireland in foreign literature
is found in a Greek poem of the fifth century before Christ,
where the historian repeats the Phoenician tradition. The
language that the Latin writer of comedy, Plautus, put in the
mouth of Phoenicians in his comedy <Poenulus> is almost the same
language that the Irish peasants speak today, according to the
critic Vallancey. The religion and civilization of this ancient
people, later known by the name of Druidism, were Egyptian. The
Druid priests had their temples in the open, and worshipped the
sun and moon in groves of oak trees. In the crude state of
knowledge of those times, the Irish priests were considered very
learned, and when Plutarch mentions Ireland, he says that it was
the dwelling place of holy men. Festus Avienus in the fourth
century was the first to give Ireland the title of <Insula
Sacra>; and later, after having undergone the invasions of the
Spanish and Gaelic tribes, it was converted to Christianity by
St. Patrick and his followers, and again earned the title of
'Holy Isle'.
  I do not propose to give a complete history of the Irish church
in the first centuries of the Christian era. To do so would be
beyond the scope of this lecture, and, in addition, not overly
interesting. But it is necessary to give you some explanation of
my title 'Island of Saints and Sages', and to show you its
historical basis. Leaving aside the names of the innumerable
churchmen whose work was exclusively national, I beg you to
follow me for a few minutes while I expose to your view the
traces that the numerous Celtic apostles in almost every country
have left behind them. It is necessary to recount briefly events
that today seem trivial to the lay mind, because in the centuries
in which they occurred and in all the succeeding Middle Ages, not
only history itself, but the sciences and the various arts were
all completely religious in character, under the guardianship of
a more than maternal church. And, in fact, what were the Italian
scientists and artists before the Renaissance if not obedient
handmaids of God, erudite commentators of sacred writings, or
illustrators in verse or painting of the Christian fable ?
  It will seem strange that an island as remote as Ireland from
the centre of culture could excel as a school for apostles, but
even a superficial consideration will show us that the Irish
nation's insistence on developing its own culture by itself is
not so much the demand of a young nation that wants to make good
in the European concert as the demand of a very old nation to
renew under new forms the glories of a past civilization. Even in
the first century of the Christian era, under the apostleship of
St. Peter, we find the Irishman Mansuetus, who was later
canonized, serving as a missionary in Lorraine, where he founded
a church and preached for half a century. Cataldus had a
cathedral and two hundred theologians at Geneva, and was later
made bishop of Taranto. The great heresiarch Belagius, a
traveller and tireless propagandist, if not an Irishman, as many
contend, was certainly either Irish or Scottish, as was his right
hand, Caelestius. Sedulius traversed a great part of the world,
and finally settled at Rome, where he composed the beauties of
almost five hundred theological tracts, and many sacred hymns
that are used even today in Catholic ritual. Fridolinus Viator,
that is, the Voyager, of royal Irish stock, was a missionary
among the Germans, and died at Seckingen in Germany, where he is
buried. Fiery Columbanus had the task of reforming the French
church, and, after having started a civil war in Burgundy by his
preaching, went to Italy, where he became the apostle of the
Lombards and founded the monastery at Bobbio. Frigidian, son of
the king of northern Ireland, occupied the bishopric of Lucca.
St. Gall, who at first was the student and companion of
Columbanus, lived among the Grisons in Switzerland as a hermit,
hunting, and fishing, and cultivating his fields by himself. He
refused the bishopric of the city of Constance, which was offered
to him, and died at the age of ninety-five. On the site of his
hermitage an abbey rose, and its abbot became prince of the
canton by the grace of God, and greatly enriched the Benedict.ne
library, whose ruins are still shown to those who visit the
ancient town of St. Gall.
  Finnian, called the Learned, founded a school of theology on
the banks of the river Boyne in Ireland, where he taught Catholic
doctrine to thousands of students from Great Britain, France,
Armorica, and Germany, giving them all (O happy time!) not only
their books and instruction but also free room and board.
However, it seems that some of them neglected to fill their study
lamps, and one student whose lamp went out suddenly had to invoke
the divine grace, which made his fingers shine miraculously in
such a way that by running his luminous fingers through the
pages, he was able to satisfy his thirst for knowledge. St.
Fiacre, for whom there is a commemorative plaque in the church of
St. Mathurin in Paris, preached to the French and conducted
extravagant funerals at the expense of the court. Fursey founded
monasteries in five countries, and his feast day is still
celebrated at Peronne, the place where he died in Picardy.
  Arbogast built sanctuaries and chapels in Alsace and Lorraine,
and ruled the bishop's see at Strasbourg for five years until,
feeling that he was near his end (according to his Dauphin) he
went to live in a hut at the place where criminals were put to
death and where later the great cathedral of the city was built.
St. Verus became champion of the cult of the Virgin Mary in
France, and Disibod, bishop of Dublin, travelled here and there
through all of Germany for more than forty years, and finally
founded a Benedictine monastery named Mount Disibod, now called
Disenberg. Rumold became bishop of Mechlin in France, and the
martyr Albinus, with Charlemagne's help, founded an institute of
science at Paris and another which he directed for many years in
ancient Ticinum (now Pavia). Kilian, the apostle of Franconia,
was consecrated bishop of Wurzburg, in Germany, but, trying to
play the part of John the Baptist between Duke Gozbert and his
mistress, he was killed by cut-throats. Sedulius the younger was
chosen by Gregory II for the mission of settling the quarrels of
the clergy in Spain, but when he arrived there, the Spanish
priests refused to listen to him, on the grounds that he was a
foreigner. To this Sedulius replied that since he was an Irishman
of the ancient race of Milesius, he was in fact a native
Spaniard. This argument so thoroughly convinced his opponents
that they allowed him to be installed in the bishop's palace at
Oreto.
  In sum, the period that ended in Ireland with the invasion of
the Scandinavian tribes in the eighth century is nothing but an
unbroken record of apostleships, and missions, and martyrdoms.
King Alfred, who visited the country and left us his impressions
of it in the verses called 'The Royal Journey', tells us in the
first stanza:

          I found when I was in exile
          In Ireland the beautiful
          Many ladies, a serious people,
          Laymen and priests in abundance

and it must be admitted that in twelve centuries the picture has
not changed much; although, if the good Alfred, who found an
abundance of laymen and priests in Ireland at that time, were
togo there now, he would find more of the latter than the former.
  Anyone who reads the history of the three centuries that pre
cede the coming of the English must have a strong stomach,
because the internecine strife, and the conflicts with the Danes
and the Norwegians, the black foreigners and the white
foreigners, as they were called, follow each other so
continuously and ferociously that they make this entire era a
veritable slaughterhouse. The Danes occupied all the principal
ports on the east coast of the island and established a kingdom
at Dublin, now the capital of Ireland, which has been a great
city for about twenty centuries. Then the native kings killed
each other off, taking well-earned rests from time to time in
games of chess. Finally, the bloody victory of the usurper Brian
Boru over the nordic hordes on the sand dunes outside the walls
of Dublin put an end to the Scandinavian raids. The
Scandinavians, however, did not leave the country, but were
gradually assimilated into the community, a fact that we must
keep in mind if we want to understand the curious character of
the modern Irishman.
  During this period, the culture necessarily languished, but
Ireland had the honour of producing the three great heresiarchs
John Duns Scotus, Macarius, and Vergilius Solivagus. Vergilius
was appointed by the French king to the abbey at Salzburg and
later was made bishop of that diocese, where he built a
cathedral. He was a philosopher, mathematician, and translator of
the writings of Ptolemy. In his tract on geography, he held the
theory, which was subversive at that time, that the earth was
round, and for such audacity was declared a sower of heresy by
Popes Boniface and Zacharias. Macarius lived in France, and the
monastery of St. Eligius still preserves his tract <De Anima>, in
which he taught the doctrine later known as Averroism, of which
Ernest Renan, himself a Breton Celt, has left us a masterful
examination. Scotus Erigena, Rector of the University of Paris,
was a mystical pantheist, who translated from the Greek the books
of mystical theology of Dionysius, the pseudo-Areopagite, patron
saint of the French nation. This translation presented to Europe
for the first time the transcendental philosophy of the Orient,
which had as much influence on the course of European religious
thought as later the translations of Plato, made in the time of
Pico della Mirandola, had on the development of the profane
Italian civilization. It goes without saying that such an
innovation (which seemed like a life-giving breath resurrecting
the dead bones of orthodox theology piled up in an inviolable
churchyard, a field of Ardath) did not have the sanction of the
Pope, who invited Charles the Bald to send both the book and the
author to Rome under escort, probably because he wanted to have
them taste the delights of papal courtesy. However, it seems that
Scotus had kept a grain of good sense in his exalted brain,
because he pretended not to hear this courteous invitation and
departed in haste for his native land.
  From the time of the English invasion to our time, there is an
interval of almost eight centuries, and if I have dwelt rather at
length on the preceding period in order to make you understand
the roots of the Irish temperament, I do not intend to detain you
by recounting the vicissitudes of Ireland under the foreign
occupation. I especially will not do so because at that time
Ireland ceased to be an intellectual force in Europe. The
decorative arts, at which the ancient Irish excelled, were
abandoned, and the sacred and profane culture fell into disuse.
  Two or three illustrious names shine here like the last few
stars of a radiant night that wanes as dawn arrives. According to
legend, John Duns Scotus, of whom I have spoken before, the
founder of the school of Scotists, listened to the arguments of
all the Doctors of the University of Paris for three whole days,
then rose and, speaking from memory, refuted them one by one;
Joannes de Sacrobosco, who was the last great supporter of the
geographical and astronomical theories of Ptolemy, and Petrus
Hibernus, the theologian who had the supreme task of educating
the mind of the author of the scholastic apology <Summa contra
Gentiles>, St. Thomas Aquinas, perhaps the keenest and most lucid
mind known to human history.
  But while these last stars still reminded the European nations
of Ireland's past glory, a new Celtic race was arising,
compounded of the old Celtic stock and the Scandinavian,
Anglo-Saxon, and Norman races. Another national temperament rose
on the foundation of the old one, with the various elements
mingling and renewing the ancient body. The ancient enemies made
common cause against the English aggression, with the Protestant
inhabitants (who had become <Hibernis Hiberniores>, more Irish
than the Irish themselves) urging on the Irish Catholics in their
opposition to the Calvinist and Lutheran fanatics from across the
sea, and the descendants of the Danish and Norman and Anglo-Saxon
settlers championing the cause of the new Irish nation against
the British tyranny.
  Recently, when an Irish member of parliament was making a
speech to the voters on the night before an election, he boasted
that he was one of the ancient race and rebuked his opponent for
being the descendant of a Cromwellian settler. His rebuke
provoked a general laugh in the press, for, to tell the truth, to
exclude from the present nation all who are descended from
foreign families would be impossible, and to deny the name of
patriot to all those who are not of Irish stock would be to deny
it to almost all the heroes of the modern movement--Lord Edward
Fitzgerald, Robert Emmet, Theobald Wolfe Tone and Napper Tandy,
leaders of the uprising of 1798, Thomas Davis and John Mitchel,
leaders of the Young Ireland movement, Isaac Butt, Joseph Biggar,
the inventor of parliamentary obstructionism, many of the
anticlerical Fenians, and, finally, Charles Stewart Parnell, who
was perhaps the most formidable man that ever led the Irish, but
in whose veins there was not even a drop of Celtic blood.
  In the national calendar, two days, according to the patriots,
must be marked as ill-omened--that of the Anglo-Saxon and Norman
invasion, and that, a century ago, of the union of the two
parliaments. Now, at this point, it is important to recall two
piquant and significant facts. Ireland prides itself on being
faithful body and soul to its national tradition as well as to
the Holy See. The majority of the Irish consider fidelity to
these two traditions their cardinal article of faith. But the
fact is that the English came to Ireland at the repeated requests
of a native king,l without, needless to say, any great desire on
their part, and without the consent of their own king, but armed
with the papal bull of Adrian IV and a papal letter of Alexander.
They landed on the east coast with seven hundred men, a band of
adventurers against a nation; they were received by some native
tribes, and in less than a year, the English King Henry II
celebrated Christmas with gusto in the city of Dublin. In
addition, there is the fact that parliamentary union was not
legislated at Westminster but at Dublin, by a parliament elected
by the vote of the people of Ireland, a parliament corrupted and
undermined with the greatest ingenuity by the agents of the
English prime minister, but an Irish parliament nevertheless.
From my point of view, these two facts must be thoroughly
explained before the country in which they occurred has the most
rudimentary right to persuade one of her sons to change his
position from that of an unprejudiced observer to that of a
convinced nationalist.
  On the other hand, impartiality can easily be confused with a
convenient disregard of facts, and if an observer, fully
convinced that at the time of Henry II Ireland was a body torn by
fierce strife and at the time of William Pitt was a venal and
wicked mess of corruption, draws from these facts the conclusion
that England does not have many crimes to expiate in Ireland, now
and in the future, he is very much mistaken. When a victorious
country tyrannizes over another, it cannot logically be
considered wrong for that other to rebel. Men are made this way,
and no one who is not deceived by self-interest or ingenuousness
will believe, in this day and age, that a colonial country is
motivated by purely Christian motives. These are forgotten when
foreign shores are invaded, even if the missionary and the pocket
Bible precede, by a few months, as a routine matter, the arrival
of the soldiers and the uplifters. If the Irishmen at home have
not been able to do what their brothers have done in America, it
does not mean that they never will, nor is it logical on the part
of English historians to salute the memory of George Washington
and profess themselves well content with the progress of an
independent, almost socialist, republic in Australia while they
treat the Irish separatists as madmen.
  A moral separation already exists between the two countries. I
do not remember ever having heard the English hymn 'God Save the
King' sung in public without a storm of hisses, shouts, and
shushes that made the solemn and majestic music absolutely
inaudible. But to be convinced of this separation, one should
have been in the streets when Queen Victoria entered the Irish
capital the year before her death. Above all, it is necessary to
notice that when an English monarch wants to go to Ireland, for
political reasons, there is always a lively flurry to persuade
the mayor to receive him at the gates of the city. But, in fact,
the last monarch who entered had to be content with an informal
reception by the sheriff, since the mayor had refused the honour.
(I note here merely as a curiosity that the present mayor of
Dublin is an Italian, Mr. Nannetti.)
  Queen Victoria had been in Ireland only once, fifty years
before,l [nine years] after her marriage. At that time, the Irish
(who had not completely forgotten their fidelity to the
unfortunate Stuarts, nor the name of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots,
nor the legendary fugitive, Bonnie Prince Charlie) had the wicked
idea of mocking the Queen's consort as though he were an
abdicated German prince, amusing themselves by imitating the way
he was said to lisp English, and greeting him exuberantly with a
cabbage stalk just at the moment when he set foot on Irish soil.
  The Irish attitude and the Irish character were antipathetic to
the queen, who was fed on the aristocratic and imperialistic
theories of Benjamin Disraeli, her favourite minister, and showed
little or no interest in the lot of the Irish people, except for
disparaging remarks, to which they naturally responded in a
lively way. Once, it is true, when there was a horrible disaster
in county Kerry which left most of the county without food or
shelter, the queen, who held on tightly to her millions, sent the
relief committee, which had already collected thousands of pounds
from benefactors of all social classes, a royal grant in the
total amount of ten pounds. As soon as the committee noticed the
arrival of such a gift, they put it in an envelope and sent it
back to the donor by return mail, together with their card of
thanks. From these little incidents, it would appear that there
was little love lost between Victoria and her Irish subjects, and
if she decided to visit them in the twilight of her years, such a
visit was most certainly motivated by politics.
  The truth is that she did not come; she was sent by her
advisers. At that time, the English debacle in South Africa in
the war against the Boers had made the English army an object of
scorn in the European press, and if it took the genius of the two
commanders-in-chief, Lord Roberts and Lord Kitchener (both of
them Irishmen, born in Ireland) to redeem its threatened prestige
(just as in 1815 it took the genius of another Irish soldier to
overcome the renewed might of Napoleon at Waterloo), it also took
Irish recruits and volunteers to demonstrate their renowned
valour on the field of battle. In recognition of this fact, when
the war ùvas over, the English government allowed the Irish
regiments to wear the shamrock, the patriotic emblem, on St.
Patrick's Day. In fact, the Queen came over for the purpose of
capturing the easy-going sympathies of the country, and adding to
the lists of the recruiting sergeants.
  I have said that to understand the gulf that still separates
the two nations, one should have been present at her entry into
Dublin. Along the way were arrayed the little English soldiers
(because, since the time of James Stephens' Fenian revolt, the
government had never sent Irish regiments to Ireland), and behind
this barrier stood the crowd of citizens. In the decorated
balconies were the officials and their wives, the unionist
employees and their wives, the tourists and their wives. When the
procession appeared, the people in the balconies began to shout
greetings and wave their handkerchiefs. The Queen's carriage
passed, carefully protected on all sides by an impressive body of
guards with bared sabres, and within was seen a tiny lady, almost
a dwarf, tossed and jolted by the movements of the carriage,
dressed in mourning, and wearing horn-rimmed glasses on a livid
and empty face. Now and then she bowed fitfully, in reply to some
isolated shout of greeting, like one who has learned her lesson
badly. She bowed to left and right, with a vague and mechanical
movement. The English soldiers stood respectfully at attention
while their patroness passed, and behind them, the crowd of
citizens looked at the ostentatious procession and the pathetic
central figure with curious eyes and almost with pity; and when
the carriage passed, they followed it with ambiguous glances.
This time there were no bombs or cabbage stalks, but the old
Queen of England entered the Irish capital in the midst of a
silent people.
  The reasons for this difference in temperament, which has now
become a commonplace of the phrase-makers of Fleet Street, are in
part racial and in part historical. Our civilization is a vast
fabric, in which the most diverse elements are mingled, in which
nordic aggressiveness and Roman law, the new bourgeois
conventions and the remnant of a Syriac religion are reconciled.
In such a fabric, it is useless to look for a thread that may
have remained pure and virgin without having undergone the
influence of a neighbouring thread. What race, or what language
(if we except the few whom a playful will seems to have preserved
in ice, like the people of Iceland) can boast of being pure
today? And no race has less right to utter such a boast than the
race now living in Ireland. Nationality (if it really is not a
convenient fiction like so many others to which the scalpels of
present-day scientists have given the coup de grace) must find
its reason for being rooted in something that surpasses and
transcends and informs changing things like blood and the human
word. The mystic theologian who assumed the pseudonym of
Dionysius, the pseudo-Areopagite, says somewhere, 'God has
disposed the limits of nations according to his angels', and this
probably is not a purely mystical concept. Do we not see that in
Ireland the Danes, the Firbolgs, the Milesians from Spain, the
Norman invaders, and the Anglo-Saxon settlers have united to form
a new entity, one might say under the influence of a local deity?
And, although the present race in Ireland is backward and
inferior, it is worth taking into account the fact that it is the
only race of the entire Celtic family that has not been willing
to sell its birthright for a mess of pottage.
  I find it rather naive to heap insults on England for her
misdeeds in Ireland. A conqueror cannot be casual, and for so
many centuries the Englishman has done in Ireland only what the
Belgian is doing today in the Congo Free State, and what the
Nipponese dwarf will do tomorrow in other lands. She enkindled
its factions and took over its treasury. By the introduction of a
new system of agriculture, she reduced the power of the native
leaders and gave great estates to her soldiers. She persecuted
the Roman church when it was rebellious and stopped when it
became an effective instrument of subjugation. Her principal
preoccupation was to keep the country divided, and if a Liberal
English government that enjoyed the full confidence of the
English voters were to grant a measure of autonomy to Ireland
tomorrow, the conservative press of England would immediately
begin to incite the province of Ulster against the authority in
Dublin.
  She was as cruel as she was cunning. Her weapons were, and
still are, the battering-ram, the club, and the rope; and if
Parnell was a thorn in the English side, it was primarily because
when he was a boy in Wicklow he heard stories of the English
ferocity from his nurse. A story that he himself told was about a
peasant who had broken the penal laws and was seized at the order
of a colonel, stripped, bound to a cart, and whipped by the
troops. By the colonel's orders, the whipping was administered on
his abdomen in such a way that the miserable man died in
atrocious pain, his intestines falling out onto the roadway.
  The English now disparage the Irish because they are Catholic,
poor, and ignorant; however, it will not be so easy to justify
such disparagement to some people. Ireland is poor because
English laws ruined the country's industries, especially the wool
industry, because the neglect of the English government in the
years of the potato famine allowed the best of the population to
die from hunger,l and because under the present administration,
while Ireland is losing its population and crimes are almost
non-existent, the judges receive the salary of a king, and
governing officials and those in public service receive huge sums
for doing little or nothing. In Dublin alone, to take an example,
the Lord Lieutenant receives a half-million francs a year. For
each policeman, the Dublin citizens pay 3,500 francs a year
(twice as much, I suppose, as a high school teacher receives in
Italy), and the poor fellow who performs the duties of chief
clerk of the city is forced to get along as well as he can on a
miserable salary of 6 pounds sterling a day. The English critic
is right, then, Ireland is poor, and moreover it is politically
backward. For the Irish, the dates of Luther's Reformation and
the French Revolution mean nothing. The feudal struggles of the
nobles against the king, known in England as the Barons' War, had
their counterpart in Ireland. If the English barons knew how to
slaughter their neighbours in a noble manner, the Irish barons
did, too. At that time in Ireland, there was no lack of ferocious
deeds, the fruit of aristocratic blood. The Irish prince, Shane
O'Neill, was so strongly blessed by nature that they had to bury
him up to his neck in his mother earth every so often, when he
had a desire for carnal pleasure. But the Irish barons, cunningly
divided by the foreign politician, were never able to act in a
common plan. They indulged in childish civil disputes among
themselves, and wasted the vitality of the country in wars, while
their brothers across St. George's Channel forced King John to
sign the Magna Charta (the first chapter of modern liberty) on
the field of Runnymede.
  The wave of democracy that shook England at the time of Simon
de Montfort, founder of the House of Commons, and later, at the
time of Cromwell's protectorate, was spent when it reached the
shores of Ireland; so that now Ireland (a country destined by God
to be the everlasting caricature of the serious world) is an
aristocratic country without an aristocracy. Descendants of the
ancient kings (who are addressed by their family names alone,
without a prefix) are seen in the halls of the courts of justice,
with wig and affidavits, invoking in favour of some defendant the
laws that have suppressed their royal titles. Poor fallen kings,
recognizable even in their decline as impractical Irishmen. They
have never thought of following the example of their English
brothers in a similar plight who go to wonderful America to ask
the hand of the daughter of some other king, even though he may
be a Varnish King or a Sausage King.
  Nor is it any harder to understand why the Irish citizen is a
reactionary and a Catholic, and why he mingles the names of
Cromwell and Satan when he curses. For him, the great Protector
of civil rights is a savage beast who came to Ireland to
propagate his faith by fire and sword. He does not forget the
sack of Drogheda and Waterford, nor the bands of men and women
hunted down in the furthermost islands by the Puritan, who said
that they would go 'into the ocean or into hell', nor the false
oath that the English swore on the broken stone of Limerick.l How
could he forget? Can the back of a slave forget the rod? The
truth is that the English government increased the moral value of
Catholicism when they banished it.
  Now, thanks partly to the endless speeches and partly to Fenian
violence, the reign of terror is over. The penal laws have been
revoked. Today, a Catholic in Ireland can vote, can become a
government employee, can practise a trade or profession, can
teach in a public school, can sit in parliament, can own his own
land for longer than thirty years, can keep in his stalls a horse
worth more than 5 pounds sterling, and can attend a Catholic
mass, without running the risk of being hanged, drawn, and
quartered by the common hangman. But these laws have been revoked
such a short time ago that a Nationalist member of parliament who
is still living was actually sentenced by an English jury to be
hanged, drawn, and quartered for the crime of high treason by the
common hangman (who is a mercenary in England, chosen by the
sheriff from among his mercenary colleagues for conspicuous merit
in diligence or industry.)
  The Irish populace, which is ninety per cent Catholic, no
longer contributes to the maintenance of the Protestant church,
which exists only for the well-being of a few thousand settlers.
It is enough to say that the English treasury has suffered some
loss, and that the Roman church has one more daughter. With
regard to the educational system, it allows a few streams of
modern thought to filter slowly into the arid soil. In time,
perhaps there will be a gradual reawakening of the Irish
conscience, and perhaps four or five centuries after the Diet of
Worms, we will see an Irish monk throw away his frock, run off
with some nun, and proclaim in a loud voice the end of the
coherent absurdity that was Catholicism and the beginning of the
incoherent absurdity that is Protestantism.
  But a Protestant Ireland is almost unthinkable. Without any
doubt, Ireland has been up to now the most faithful daughter of
the Catholic church. It is perhaps the only country that received
the first Christian missionaries with courtesy and was converted
to the new doctrine without spilling a drop of blood. And, in
fact, the ecclesiastical history of Ireland completely lacks a
martyrology, as the Bishop of Cashel had occasion to boast in a
reply to the mocker, Giraldus Cambrensis. For six or eight
centuries it was the spiritual focus of Christianity. It sent its
sons to every country in the world to preach the gospel, and its
Doctors to interpret and renew the holy writings. Its faith was
never once shaken seriously, if we except a certain doctrinal
tendency of Nestorius in the fifth century concerning the
hypostatic union of the two natures in Jesus Christ, some
negligible differences in ritual noticeable at the same time,
such as the kind of clerical tonsure and the time of celebrating
Easter, and finally, the defection of some priests at the urging
of the reform emissaries of Edward VII. But at the first
intimation that the church was running into danger, a veritable
swarm of Irish envoys left at once for all the coasts of Europe,
where they attempted to stir up a strong general movement among
the Catholic powers against the heretics.
  Well, the Holy See has repaid this fidelity in its own way.
First, by means of a papal bull and a ring, it gave Ireland to
Henry II of England, and later, in the papacy of Gregory XIII,
when the Protestant heresy raised its head, it repented having
given faithful Ireland to the English heretics, and to redeem the
error, it named a bastard of the papal court as supreme ruler of
Ireland. He naturally remained a king <in partibus infidelium>,
but the pope's intention was none the less courteous because of
this. On the other hand, Ireland's compliance is so complete that
it would hardly murmur if tomorrow the pope, having already
turned it over to an Englishman and an Italian, were to turn
their island over to some hidalgo of the court of Alphonso who
found himself momentarily unemployed, because of some unforseen
complication in Europe. But the Holy See was more chary of its
ecclesiastical honours, and although Ireland in the past has
enriched the hagiographic archives in the manner that we have
seen, this was scarcely recognized in the councils of the
Vatican, and more than fourteen hundred years passed before the
holy father thought of elevating an Irish bishop to a cardinal.
  Now, what has Ireland gained by its fidelity to the papacy and
its infidelity to the British crown? It has gained a great deal,
but not for itself. Among the Irish writers who adopted the
English language in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and
almost forgot their native land, are found the names of Berkeley,
the idealist philosopher, Oliver Goldsmith, author of <The Vicar
of Wakefield>, two famous playwrights, Richard Brinsley Sheridan
and William Congreve, whose comic masterpieces are admired even
today on the sterile stages of modern England, Jonathan Swift,
author of <Gulliver's Travels>, which shares with Rabelais the
place of the best satire in world literature, and Edmund Burke,
whom the English themselves called the modern Demosthenes and
considered the most profound orator who had ever spoken in the
House of Commons.
  Even today, despite her heavy obstacles, Ireland is making her
contribution to English art and thought. That the Irish are
really the unbalanced, helpless idiots about whom we read in the
lead articles of the <Standard> and the <Morning Post> is denied
by the names of the three greatest translators in English
literature -- FitzGerald, translator of the <Rubaiyat> of the
Persian poet Omar Khayyam, Burton, translator of the Arabian
masterpieces, and Cary, the classic translator of the <Divine
Comedy>. It is also denied by the names of other Irishmen --
Arthur Sullivan, the dean of modern English music, Edward
O'Connor, founder of Chartism, the novelist George Moore, an
intellectual oasis in the Sahara of the false spiritualistic,
Messianic, and detective writings whose name is legion in
England, by the names of two Dubliners, the paradoxical and
iconoclastic writer of comedy, George Bernard Shaw, and the too
well known Oscar Wilde, son of a revolutionary poetess .
  Finally, in the field of practical affairs this pejorative
conception of Ireland is given the lie by the fact that when the
Irishman is found outside of Ireland in another environment, he
very often becomes a respected man. The economic and intellectual
conditions that prevail in his own country do not permit the
development of individuality. The soul of the country is weakened
by centuries of useless struggle and broken treaties, and
individual initiative is paralysed by the influence and
admonitions of the church, while its body is manacled by the
police, the tax office, and the garrison. No one who has any
self-respect stays in Ireland, but flees afar as though from a
country that has undergone the visitation of an angered Jove.
  From the time of the Treaty of Limerick, or rather, from the
time that it was broken by the English in bad faith, millions of
Irishmen have left their native land. These fugitives, as they
were centuries ago, are called the wild geese. They enlisted in
all the foreign brigades of the powers of Europe -- France,
Holland, and Spain, to be exact -- and won on many battlefields
the laurel of victory for their adopted masters. In America, they
found another native land. In the ranks of the American rebels
was heard the old Irish language, and Lord Mountjoy himself said
in 1784, 'We have lost America through the Irish emigrants.'
Today, these Irish emigrants in the United States number sixteen
million, a rich, powerful, and industrious settlement. Maybe this
does not prove that the Irish dream of a revival is not entirely
an illusion !
  If Ireland has been able to give to the service of others men
like Tyndall, one of the few scientists whose name has spread
beyond his own field, like the Marquess of Dufferin, Governor of
Canada and Viceroy of India, like Charles Gavin Duffy, and
Hennessey, colonial governors, like the Duke de Tetuan, the
recent Spanish minister, like Bryan, candidate for president of
the United States, like Marshal MacMahon, president of the French
Republic, like Lord Charles Beresford, virtual head of the
English navy, just recently placed in command of the Channel
Fleet, like the three most renowned generals of the English
army--Lord Wolseley, the commander-in-chief, Lord Kitchener,
victor of the Sudan campaign and at present commanding general of
the army in India, and Lord Roberts, victor of the war in
Afghanistan and South Africa--if Ireland has been able to give
all this practical talent to the service of others, it means that
there must be something inimical, unpropitious, and despotic in
its own present conditions, since her sons cannot give their
efforts to their own native land.
  Because, even today, the flight of the wild geese continues.
Every year, Ireland, decimated as she already is, loses 60,000 of
her sons. From 1850 to the present day, more than 5,000,000
emigrants have left for America, and every post brings to Ireland
their inviting letters to friends and relatives at home. The old
men, the corrupt, the children, and the poor stay at home, where
the double yoke wears another groove in the tamed neck; and
around the death bed where the poor, anaemic, almost lifeless,
body lies in agony, the rulers give orders and the priests
administer last rites.
  Is this country destined to resume its ancient position as the
Hellas of the north some day? Is the Celtic mind, like the Slavic
mind which it resembles in many ways, destined to enrich the
civil conscience with new discoveries and new insights in the
future? Or must the Celtic world, the five Celtic nations, driven
by stronger nations to the edge of the continent, to the
outermost islands of Europe, finally be cast into the ocean after
a struggle of centuries? Alas, we dilettante sociologists are
only second-class augurers. We look and peer into the innards of
the human animal, and, after all, confess that we see nothing
there. Only our supermen know how to write the history of the
future.
  It would be interesting, but beyond the scope I have set myself
tonight, to see what might be the effects on our civilization of
a revival of this race. The economic effects of the appearance of
a rival island near England, a bilingual, republican,
self-centred, and enterprising island with its own commercial
fleet, and its own consuls in every port of the world. l~nd the
moral effects of the appearance in old Europe of the Irish artist
and thinker--those strange spirits, frigid enthusiasts, sexually
and artistically untaught, full of idealism and unable to yield
to it, childish spirits, ingenuous and satirical, 'the loveless
Irishmen', as they are called. But in anticipation of such a
revival, I confess that I do not see what good it does to
fulminate against the English tyranny while the Roman tyranny
occupies the palace of the soul.
  I do not see the purpose of the bitter invectives against the
English despoiler, the disdain for the vast Anglo-Saxon
civilization, even though it is almost entirely a materialistic
civilization, nor the empty boasts that the art of miniature in
the ancient Irish books, such as the <Book of Kells>, the <Yellow
Book of Lecan>, the <Book of the Dun Cox>, which date back to a
time when England was an uncivilized country, is almost as old as
the Chinese, and that Ireland made and exported to Europe its own
fabrics for several generations before the first Fleming arrived
in London to teach the English how to make bread. If an appeal to
the past in this manner were valid, the fellahin of Cairo would
have all the right in the world to disdain to act as porters for
English tourists.l Ancient Ireland is dead just as ancient Egypt
is dead. Its death chant has been sung, and on its gravestone has
been placed the seal. The old national soul that spoke during the
centuries through the mouths of fabulous seers, wandering
minstrels, and Jacobite poets disappeared from the world with the
death of James Clarence Mangan. With him, the long tradition of
the triple order of the old Celtic bards ended; and today other
bards, animated by other ideals, have the cry.
  One thing alone seems clear to me. It is well past time for
Ireland to have done once and for all with failure. If she is
truly capable of reviving, let her awake, or let her cover up her
head and lie down decently in her grave forever. 'We Irishmen',
said Oscar Wilde one day to a friend of mine, 'have done nothing,
but we are the greatest talkers since the time of the Greeks.'
But though the Irish are eloquent, a revolution is not made of
human breath and compromises. Ireland has already had enough
equivocations and misunderstandings. If she wants to put on the
play that we have waited for so long, this time let it be whole,
and complete, and definitive. But our advice to the Irish
producers is the same as that our fathers gave them not so long
ago -- hurry up! I am sure that I, at least, will never see that
curtain go up, because I will have already gone home on the last
train.
