
8.   St. Stephen's    May 1902


James Clarence Mangan

  'Memorial I would have . . . a constant presence with those
that love me.'

  It is many a day since the dispute of the classical and
romantic schools began in the quiet city of the arts, so that
criticism, which has wrongly decided that the classical temper is
the romantic temper grown older, has been driven to recognize
these as constant states of mind. Though the dispute has been
often ungentle (to say no more) and has seemed to some a dispute
about names and with time has become a confused battle, each
school advancing to the borders of the other and busy with
internal strife, the classical school fighting the materialism
which attends it, and the romantic school to preserve coherence,
yet as this unrest is the condition of all achievement, it is so
far good, and presses slowly towards a deeper insight which will
make the schools at one. Meanwhile no criticism is just which
avoids labour by setting up a standard of maturity by which to
judge the schools. The romantic school is often and grievously
misinterpreted, not more by others than by its own, for that
impatient temper which, as it could see no fit abode here for its
ideals, chose to behold them under insensible figures, comes to
disregard certain limitations, and, because these figures are
blown high and low by the mind that conceived them, comes at
times to regard them as feeble shadows moving aimlessly about the
light, obscuring it; and the same temper, which assuredly has not
grown more patient, exclaims that the light is changed to worse
than shadow, to darkness even, by any method which bends upon
these present things and so works upon them and fashions them
that the quick intelligence may go beyond them to their meaning,
which is still unuttered. Yet so long as this place in nature is
given us, it is right that art should do no violence to that
gift, though it may go far beyond the stars and the waters in the
service of what it loves. Wherefore the highest praise must be
withheld from the romantic school (though the most enlightened of
Western poets be thereby passed over), and the cause of the
impatient temper must be sought in the artist and in his theme.
Nor must the laws of his art be forgotten in the judgment of the
artist, for no error is more general than the judgment of a man
of letters by the supreme laws of poetry. Verse, indeed, is not
the only expression of rhythm, but poetry in any art transcends
the mode of its expression; and to name what is less than poetry
in the arts, there is need of new terms, though in one art the
term 'literature' may be used. Literature is the wide domain
which lies between ephemeral writing and poetry (with which is
philosophy), and just as the greater part of verse is not
literature, so even original writers and thinkers must often be
jealously denied the most honourable title; and much of
Wordsworth, and almost all of Baudelaire, is merely literature in
verse and must be judged by the laws of literature. Finally, it
must be asked concerning every artist how he is in relation to
the highest knowledge and to those laws which do not take holiday
because men and times forget them. This is not to look for a
message but to approach the temper which has made the work, an
old woman praying, or a young man fastening his shoe, and to see
what is there well done and how much it signifies. A song by
Shakespeare or Verlaine, which seems so free and living and as
remote from any conscious purpose as rain that falls in a garden
or the lights of evening, is discovered to be the rhythmic speech
of an emotion otherwise incommunicable, at least so fitly.4 But
to approach the temper which has made art is an act of reverence
and many conventions must be first put off, for certainly the
inmost region will never yield to one who is enmeshed with
profanities.
  That was a strange question which the innocent Parsifal asked
-- 'Who is good?' and it is recalled to mind when one reads
certain criticisms and biographies, for which the influence of a
modern writer, misunderstood as the worship of broad-cloth, is
answerable. When these criticisms are insincere they are
humorous, but the case is worse when they are as sincere as such
things can be. And so, when Mangan is remembered in his country
(for he is sometimes spoken of in literary societies), his
countrymen lament that such poetic faculty was mated with so
little rectitude of conduct, surprised to find this faculty in a
man whose vices were exotic and who was little of a patriot.
Those who have written of him, have been scrupulous in holding
the balance between the drunkard and the opium-eater, and have
sought to discover whether learning or imposture lies behind such
phrases as 'from the Ottoman' or 'from the Coptic': and save for
this small remembrance, Mangan has been a stranger in his
country, a rare and unsympathetic figure in the streets, where he
is seen going forward alone like one who does penance for some
ancient sin. Surely life, which Novalis has called a malady of
the spirit, is a heavy penance for him who has, perhaps,
forgotten the sin that laid it upon him, a sorrowful portion,
too, because of that fine artist in him which reads so truly the
lines of brutality and of weakness in the faces of men that are
thrust in upon his path. He bears it well for the most part,
acquiescing in the justice which has made him a vessel of wrath,
but in a moment of frenzy he breaks silence, and we read how his
associates dishonoured his person with their slime and venom, and
how he lived as a child amid coarseness and misery and that all
whom he met were demons out of the pit and that his father was a
human boa-constrictor. Certainly he is wiser who accuses no man
of acting unjustly towards him, seeing that what is called
injustice is never so but is an aspect of justice, yet they who
think that such a terrible tale is the figment of a disordered
brain do not know how keenly a sensitive boy suffers from contact
with a gross nature. Mangan, however, is not without some
consolation, for his sufferings have cast him inwards, where for
many ages the sad and the wise have elected to be. When someone
told him that the account which he had given of his early life,
so full of things which were, indeed, the beginnings of sorrows,
was wildly overstated, and partly false, he answered -- 'Maybe I
dreamed it.' The world, you see, has become somewhat unreal for
him, and he has begun to contemn that which is, in fine, the
occasion of much error. How will it be with those dreams which,
for every young and simple heart, take such dear reality upon
themselves? One whose nature is so sensitive cannot forget his
dreams in a secure, strenuous life. He doubts them, and puts them
from him for a time, but when he hears men denying them with an
oath he would acknowledge them proudly, and where sensitiveness
has induced weakness, or, as here, refined upon natural weakness,
would even compromise with the world, and win from it in return
the favour of silence, if no more, as for something too slight to
bear a violent disdain, for that desire of the heart so loudly
derided, that rudely entreated idea. His manner is such that none
can say if it be pride or humility that looks out of that vague
face, which seems to live only because of those light shining
eyes and of the fair silken hair above it, of which he is a
little vain. This purely defensive reserve is not without dangers
for him, and in the end it is only his excesses that save him
from indifference. Something has been written of an affair of the
heart between him and a pupil of his, to whom he gave lessons in
German, and, it seems; he was an actor afterwards in a
love-comedy of three, but if he is reserved with men, he is shy
with women, and he is too self-conscious, too critical, knows too
little of the soft parts of conversation, for a gallant. And in
his strange dress, in which some have seen eccentricity, and
others affectation -- the high, conical hat, the loose trousers
many sizes too big for him, and the old umbrella, so like a
bagpipes -- one may see a half-conscious expression of this. The
lore of many lands goes with him always, eastern tales and the
memory of curiously printed medieval books which have rapt him
out of his time -- gathered together day by day and embroidered
as in a web. He has acquaintance with a score of languages, of
which, upon occasion, he makes a liberal parade, and has read
recklessly in many literatures, crossing how many seas, and even
penetrating into Peristan, to which no road leads that the feet
travel. In Timbuctooese, he confesses with a charming modesty
which should prevent detractors, he is slightly deficient, but
this is no cause for regret. He is interested, too, in the life
of the seeress of Prevorst, and in all phenomena of the middle
nature and here, where most of all the sweetness and resoluteness
of the soul have power, he seems to seek in a world, how
different from that in which Watteau may have sought, both with a
certain graceful inconstancy, 'what is there in no satisfying
measure or not at all.'
  His writings, which have never been collected and which are
unknown, except for two American editions of selected poems and
some pages of prose, published by Duffy, show no order and
sometimes very little thought. Many of his essays are pretty
fooling when read once, but one cannot but discern some fierce
energy beneath the banter, which follows up the phrases with no
good intent, and there is a likeness between the desperate
writer, himself the victim of too dexterous torture, and the
contorted writing. Mangan, it must be remembered, wrote with no
native literary tradition to guide him, and for a public which
cared for matters of the day, and for poetry only so far as it
might illustrate these. He could not often revise what he wrote,
and he has often striven with Moore and Walsh on their own
ground. But the best of what he has written makes its appeal
surely, because it was conceived by the imagination which he
called, I think, the mother of things, whose dream are we, who
imageth us to herself, and to ourselves, and imageth herself in
us--the power before whose breath the mind in creation is (to use
Shelley's image) as a fading coal. Though even in the best of
Mangan the presence of alien emotions is sometimes felt the
presence of an imaginative personality reflecting the light of
imaginative beauty is more vividly felt. East and West meet in
that personality (we know how); images interweave there like
soft, luminous scarves and words ring like brilliant mail, and
whether the song is of Ireland or of Istambol it has the same
refrain, a prayer that peace may come again to her who has lost
her peace, the moonwhite pearl of his soul, Ameen. Music and
odours and lights are spread about her, and he would search the
dews and the sands that he might set another glory near her face.
A scenery and a world have grown up about her face, as they will
about any face which the eyes have regarded with love. Vittoria
Colonna and Laura and Beatrice -- even she upon whose face many
lives have cast that shadowy delicacy, as of one who broods upon
distant terrors and riotous dreams, and that strange stillness
before which love is silent, Mona Lisa -- embody one chivalrous
idea, which is no mortal thing, bearing it bravely above the
accidents of lust and faithlessness and weariness; and she whose
white and holy hands have the virtue of enchanted hands, his
virgin flower, and flower of flowers, is no less than these an
embodiment of that idea. How the East is laid under tribute for
her and must bring all its treasures to her feet! The sea that
foams over saffron sands, the lonely cedar on the Balkans, the
hall damascened with moons of gold and a breath of roses from the
gulistan -- all these shall be where she is in willing service:
reverence and peace shall be the service of the heart, as in the
verses
'To Mihri':

        My starlight, my moonlight, my midnight, my noonlight,
        Unveil not, unveil not!

And where the music shakes off its languor and is full of the
ecstasy of combat, as in the 'Lament for Sir Maurice FitzGerald',
and in 'Dark Rosaleen', it does not attain to the quality of
Whitman indeed, but is tremulous with all the changing harmonies
of Shelley's verse. Now and then this note is hoarsened and a
troop of unmannerly passions echoes it derisively, but two poems
at least sustain the music unbroken, the 'Swabian Popular Song',
and a translation of two quatrains by Wetzel. To create a little
flower, Blake said, is the labour of ages, and even one lyric has
made Dowland immortal; and the matchless passages which are found
in other poems are so good that they could not have been written
by anyone hut Mangan. He might have written a treatise on the
poetical art for he is more cunning in his use of the musical
echo than is Poe, the high priest of most modern schools, and
there is a mastery, which no school can teach, but which obeys an
interior command, which we may trace in 'Kathaleen-Ny-Houlahan',
where the refrain changes the trochaic scheme abruptly for a line
of firm, marching iambs.
  All his poetry remembers wrong and suffering and the aspiration
of one who has suffered and who is moved to great cries and
gestures when that sorrowful hour rushes upon the heart. This is
the theme of a hundred songs but of none so intense as these
songs which are made in noble misery, as his favourite Swedenborg
would say, out of the vastation of soul. Naomi would change her
name to Mara, because it has gone bitterly with her, and is it
not the deep sense of sorrow and bitterness which explains these
names and titles and this fury of translation in which he has
sought to lose himself? For he has not found in himself the faith
of the solitary, or the faith, which in the middle age, sent the
spires singing up to heaven, and he waits for the final scene to
end the penance. Weaker than Leopardi, for he has not the courage
of his own despair but forgets all ills and forgoes his scorn at
the showing of some favour, he has, perhaps for this reason, the
memorial he would have had -- a constant presence with those that
love him -- and bears witness, as the more heroic pessimist bears
witness against his will to the calm fortitude of humanity, to a
subtle sympathy with health and joyousness which is seldom found
in one whose health is safe. And so he does not shrink from the
grave and the busy workings of the earth so much as from the
unfriendly eyes of women and the hard eyes of men. To tell the
truth, he has been in love with death all his life, like
another,l and with no woman, and he has the same gentle manner as
of old to welcome him whose face is hidden with a cloud, who is
named Azrael. Those whom the flames of too fierce love have
wasted on earth become after death pale phantoms among the winds
of desire, and, as he strove here towards peace with the ardour
of the wretched, it may be that now the winds of peace visit him
and he rests, and remembers no more this bitter vestment of the
body.
  Poetry, even when apparently most fantastic, is always a revolt
against artifice, a revolt, in a sense, against actuality. It
speaks of what seems fantastic and unreal to those who have lost
the simple intuitions which are the tests of reality; and, as it
is often found at war with its age, so it makes no account of
history, which is fabled by the daughters of memory, but sets
store by every time less than the pulsation of an artery, the
time in which its intuitions start forth, holding it equal in its
period and value to six thousand years. No doubt they are only
men of letters who insist on the succession of the ages, and
history or the denial of reality, for they are two names for one
thing, may be said to be that which deceives the whole world. In
this, as in much else, Mangan is the type of his race. History
encloses him so straitly that even his fiery moments do not set
him free from it. He, too, cries out, in his life and in his
mournful verses, against the injustice of despoilers, but never
laments a deeper loss than the loss of plaids and ornaments. He
inherits the latest and worst part of a legend upon which the
line has never been drawn out and which divides against itself as
it moves down the cycles. And because this tradition is so much
with him he has accepted it with all its griefs and failures, and
has not known how to change it, as the strong spirit knows, and
so would bequeath it: the poet who hurls his anger against
tyrants would establish upon the future an intimate and far more
cruel tyranny. In the final view the figure which he worships is
seen to be an abject queen upon whom, because of the bloody
crimes that she has done and of those as bloody that were done to
her, madness is come and death is coming, but who will not
believe that she is near to die and remembers only the rumour of
voices challenging her sacred gardens and her fair, tall flowers
that have become the food of boars. Novalis said of love that it
is the Amen of the universe, and Mangan can tell of the beauty of
hate; and pure hate is as excellent as pure love. An eager spirit
would cast down with violence the high traditions of Mangan's
race -- love of sorrow for the sake of sorrow and despair and
fearful menaces -- but where their voice is a supreme entreaty to
be borne with forbearance seems only a little grace; and what is
so courteous and so patient as a great faith?
  Every age must look for its sanction to its poetry and
philosophy, for in these the human mind, as it looks backward or
forward, attains to an eternal state. The philosophic mind
inclines always to an elaborate life -- the life of Goethe or of
Leonardo da Vinci; but the life of the poet is intense -- the
life of Blake or of Dante -- taking into its centre the life that
surrounds it and flinging it abroad again amid planetary music.
With Mangan a narrow and hysterical nationality receives a last
justification, for when this feeble-bodied figure departs dusk
begins to veil the train of the gods, and he who listens may hear
their footsteps leaving the world. But the ancient gods, who are
visions of the divine names, die and come to life many times,
and, though there is dusk about their feet and darkness in their
indifferent eyes, the miracle of light is renewed eternally in
the imaginative soul. When the sterile and treacherous order is
broken up, a voice or a host of voices is heard singing, a little
faintly at first, of a serene spirit which enters woods and
cities and the hearts of men, and of the life of earth -- det
dejlige vidunderlige jordliv det gaadefulde jordliv -- beautiful,
alluring, mysterious.
  Beauty, the splendour of truth, is a gracious presence when the
imagination contemplates intensely the truth of its own being or
the visible world, and the spirit which proceeds out of truth and
beauty is the holy spirit of joy. These are realities and these
alone give and sustain life. As often as human fear and cruelty,
that wicked monster begotten by luxury, are in league to make
life ignoble and sullen and to speak evil of death the time is
come wherein a man of timid courage seizes the keys of hell and
of death, and flings them far out into the abyss, proclaiming the
praise of life, which the abiding splendour of truth may
sanctify, and of death, the most beautiful form of life. In those
vast courses which enfold us and in that great memory which is
greater and more generous than our memory, no life, no moment of
exaltation is ever lost; and all those who have written nobly
have not written in vain, though the desperate and weary have
never heard the silver laughter of wisdom. Nay, shall not such as
these have part, because of that high, original purpose which
remembering painfully or by way of prophecy they would make
clear, in the continual affirmation of the spirit?
                                      JAMES A. JOYCE              
