
35.   Essay   1907


James Clarence Mangan

  There are certain poets who, in addition to the virtue of
revealing to us some phase of the human conscience unknown until
their time, also have the more doubtful virtue of summing up in
themselves the thousand contrasting tendencies of their era, of
being, so to speak, the storage batteries of new forces. For the
most part, it is in the latter role rather than the former that
they come to be appreciated by the masses, who are by nature
unable to evaluate any work of true self-revelation, and so
hasten to recognize by some act of grace the incalculable aid
that the individual affirmation of a poet gives to a popular
movement. The most popular act of grace in such cases is a
monument, because it honours the dead while it flatters the
living. It has also the supreme advantage of finality, since, to
tell the truth, it is the most polite and effective way to assure
a lasting oblivion of the deceased. In logical and serious
countries, it is customary to finish the monument in a decent
manner, and have the sculptor, the city officials, orators, and a
great crowd of people attend the unveiling. But in Ireland, a
country destined by God to be the eternal caricature of the
serious world,l even when the monuments are for the most popular
men, whose character is most amenable to the will of the people,
they rarely get beyond the laying of the foundation stone. In the
light of the foregoing, perhaps I can give you an idea of the
Cimmerian night that enfolds the name of Clarence Mangan when I
say that, to the detriment of the noted generosity of the Emerald
Isle, up to now no ardent spirit has thought of laying the
restless ghost of the national poet with the foundation stone and
the usual wreaths. Perhaps the unbroken peace in which he lies
will have become so pleasant for him that he will be offended (if
mortal accents ever come to that world beyond the grave) at
hearing his spectral quiet disturbed by a countryman in exile, at
hearing an amateur talk about him in a strange tongue before
well-wishing foreigners.
  Ireland's contribution to European literature can be divided
into five periods and into two large parts, that is, literature
written in the Irish language and literature written in the
English language. Of the first part, which includes the first two
periods, the more remote is almost lost in the night of the times
in which all the ancient sacred books, the epics, the legal
codes, and the topographic histories and legends were written.
The more recent period lasted a long time after the invasion of
the Anglo-Saxons and Normans under Henry II and King John, the
age of the wandering minstrels, whose symbolic songs carried on
the tradition of the triple order of the old Celtic bards, and of
this period I had occasion to speak to you several nights ago.
The second part, that of Irish literature written in the English
language, is divided into three periods. The first is the
eighteenth century, which includes among other Irishmen the
glorious names of Oliver Goldsmith, author of the famous novel
<The Vicar of Wakefield>, of the two famous writers of comedy,
Richard Brinsley Sheridan and William Congreve, whose
masterpieces are admired even today on the sterile stage of
modern England, of the Rabelaisian Dean, Jonathan Swift, author
of <Gulliver's Travels>, of the so-called English Demosthenes,
Edmund Burke, whom even his English critics consider the most
profound orator that ever spoke in the House of Commons and one
of the wisest statesmen, even among the astute band of
politicians of fair Albion. The second and third periods belong
to the last century. One is the literary movement of Young
Ireland in '42 and '45, and the other the literary movement of
today, of which I intend to speak to you in my next lecture.
  The literary movement of '42 dates from the establishment of
the separatist newspaper <The Nation>, founded by the three
leaders Thomas Davis, John Blake Dillon (father of the former
leader of the Irish parliamentary party)

                      [Text missing]

of the middle class, and after a childhood passed in the midst of
domestic cruelties, misfortunes, and misery, he became a clerk in
a third-rate notary's office. He had always been a child of quiet
and unresponsive nature, secretly given to the study of various
languages, retiring, silent, preoccupied with religious matters,
without friends or acquaintances. When he began to write, he
immediately attracted the attention of the cultured, who
recognized in him an exalted lyrical music and a burning idealism
that revealed themselves in rhythms of extraordinary and
unpremeditated beauty, to be found, perhaps, nowhere else in the
range of English literature except in the inspired songs of
Shelley. Thanks to the influence of some literary men, he
obtained a position as assistant in the great library of Trinity
College, Dublin, a rich treasure of books three times as large as
the Victor Emmanuel Library in Rome, and the place where such
ancient Irish books as <The Book of the Dun Cow>, <The Yellow
Book of Lecan> (a famous legal treatise, the work of the learned
king Cormac the Magnificent, who was called the Irish Solomon)
and <The Book of Kells> are kept, books that date back to the
first century of the Christian era, and in the art of miniature
are as old as the Chinese. There it was that his biographer and
friend Mitchel saw him for the first time, and in the preface to
the poet's works, he describes the impression made on him by this
thin little man with the waxen countenance and the pale hair, who
was sitting on the top of a ladder with his legs crossed,
deciphering a huge, dusty volume in the dim light.
  In this library Mangan passed his days in study and became a
competent linguist. He knew well the Italian, Spanish, French and
German languages and literatures, as well as those of England and
Ireland, and it appears that he had some knowledge of oriental
languages, probably some Sanskrit and Arabic. From time to time
he emerged from that studious quiet to contribute some poems to
the revolutionary newspaper, but he took little interest in the
nightly meetings of the party. He passed his nights far away. His
dwelling was a dark and dingy room in the old city, a quarter of
Dublin that even today has the significant name 'The Liberties'.
His nights were so many Stations of the Cross among the
disreputable dives of 'The Liberties', where he must have made a
very strange figure in the midst of the choice flower of the
city's low-life--petty thieves, bandits, fugitives, pimps and
inexpensive harlots. It is strange to say (but it is the
consensus of opinion among his countrymen, who are always ready
to testify in such matters) that Mangan had nothing but purely
formal intercourse with this underworld. He drank little, but his
health was so weakened that drinking produced an extraordinary
effect on him. The death mask that is left to us shows a refined,
almost aristocratic face, in whose delicate lines it is
impossible to discover anything but melancholy and great
weariness.
  I understand that pathologists deny the possibility of
combining the pleasures of alcohol with those of opium, and it
seems that Mangan soon became convinced of this fact, because he
began to take narcotic drugs immoderately. Mitchel tells us that
toward the end of his life Mangan looked like a living skeleton.
His face was fleshless, barely covered with a skin as transparent
as fine China. His body was gaunt, his eyes, behind whose
infrequent glimmerings seemed to be hidden the horrible and
voluptuous memories of his visions, were large, fixed, and
vacant, his voice slow, weak, and sepulchral. He descended the
last steps toward the grave with frightening rapidity. He became
mute and ragged. He ate hardly enough to keep body and soul
together, until one day he collapsed suddenly while he was
walking in the street. When he was carried to the hospital, a few
coins and a worn book of German poetry were found in his pockets.
When he died, his miserable body made the attendants shudder, and
some charitable friends paid the cost of his sordid burial.
  So lived and died the man that I consider the most significant
poet of the modern Celtic world, and one of the most inspired
singers that ever used the lyric form in any country. It is too
early, I think, to assert that he must live forever in the drab
fields of oblivion, but I am firmly convinced that if he finally
emerges into the posthumous glory to which he has a right, it
will not be by the help of any of his countrymen. Mangan will be
accepted by the Irish as their national poet on the day when the
conflict will be decided between my native land and the foreign
powers--Anglo-Saxon and Roman Catholic, and a new civilization
will arise, either indigenous or completely foreign. Until that
time, he will be forgotten or remembered rarely on holidays as

                  [Text missing]

  The question that Wagner put into the mouth of the innocent
Parsifal must come to mind when we read from time to time certain
English criticism, due for the most part to the influence of the
blind and bitter spirit of Calvinism. It is easy to explain these
critics when they deal with a powerful and original genius,
because the appearance of such a genius is always a signal for
all the corrupt and vested interests to join together in defence
of the old order. For instance, anyone who has understood the
destructive and fiercely self-centred tendency of all of Henrik
Ibsen's works will not be astonished to hear the most influential
critics in London inveighing against the playwright on the
morning after one of Ibsen's first nights, calling him (I quote
the exact words of the deceased critic of the <Daily Telegraph>)
a filthy, muck-ferreting dog. But the case in which the poor
condemned man is some more or less innocuous poet whose fault is
that of not having been able to adhere scrupulously to the cult
of respectability is less explainable. And so it happens that
when Mangan's name is mentioned in his native land (and I must
admit that he is sometimes spoken of in literary circles) the
Irish lament that such poetic talent was found joined in him to
such licence, and they are naively surprised to find evidence of
the poetic faculty in a man whose vices were exotic and whose
patriotism was not very ardent.
  Those who have written about him have been scrupulous in
holding the balance between the drunkard and the opium-eater, and
have taken great pains to determine whether learning or imposture
was hidden behind such phrases as 'translated from the Ottoman',
'translated from the Coptic'; and save for this poor remembrance,
Mangan has been a stranger in his native land, a rare and bizarre
figure in the streets, where he is seen going sadly and alone,
like one who does penance for some ancient sin. Surely life,
which Novalis has called a malady of the spirit, is a heavy
penance for Mangan, for him who has, perhaps, forgotten the sin
that laid it on him, an inheritance so much the more sorrowful,
too, because of the delicate artist in him who reads so well the
lines of brutality and of weakness in the faces of men that look
at him with hate and scorn. In the short biographical sketch that
he has left us, he speaks only of his early life, his infancy and
childhood, and tells us that as a child he knew nothing but
sordid misery and coarseness, that his acquaintances defiled his
person with their hateful venom, that his father was a human
rattlesnake. In these violent assertions we recognize the effects
of the oriental drug, but nevertheless, those who think that his
story is only the figment of a disordered brain have never known,
or have forgotten what keen pain contact with gross natures
inflicts on a sensitive boy. His sufferings drove him to become a
hermit, and in fact he lived the greater part of his life almost
in a dream, in that sanctuary of the mind where for many
centuries the sad and the wise have elected to be. When a friend
remarked to him that the tale mentioned above was wildly
exaggerated and partly false, Mangan answered, 'Maybe I dreamed
it.' The world has evidently become somewhat unreal for him, and
not very significant.
  What, then, will become of those dreams, which, for every young
and simple heart are garbed in such dear reality? One whose
nature is so sensitive cannot forget his dreams in a secure and
strenuous life. He doubts them for the first time and rejects
them, but when he hears someone deride and curse them, he would
acknowledge them proudly; and where sensitivity has induced
weakness, or, as with Mangan, refined an innate weakness, would
even compromise with the world to win at least the favour of
silence, as for something too frail to bear a violent disdain,
for that desire of the heart so cynically derided, that cruelly
abused idea. His manner is such that none can say whether it is
pride or humility that looks out of his vague face, which seems
to live only in the clear and shining eyes, and in the fair and
silken hair, of which he is a little vain. This reserve is not
without dangers, and in the end it is only his excesses that save
him from indifference. There is some talk of an intimate relation
between Mangan and a pupil of his to whom he gave instruction in
German, and later, it seems, he took part in a love-comedy of
three, but if he is reserved with men, he is timid with women,
and he is too self-conscious, too critical, knows too little of
the flattering lie ever to be a gallant. In his strange dress --
the high conical hat, the baggy trousers three times too big for
his little legs, and the old umbrella-shaped like a torch -- we
can see an almost comical expression of his diffidence. The
learning of many lands goes with him always, eastern tales and
the remembrance of curiously printed medieval books which have
rapt him out of his time, gathered day by day and woven into a
fabric. He knows twenty languages, more or less, and sometimes
makes a liberal show of them, and has read in many literatures,
crossing how many seas, even penetrating into the land of
Peristan, which is found in no atlas. He is very much interested
in the life of the seeress of Prevorst, and in all the phenomena
of the middle nature, and here, where most of all the sweetness
and resoluteness of soul have power, he seems to seek in a
fictitious world, but how different from that in which Watteau
(in Pater's happy phrase) may have sought, both with a certain
characteristic inconstancy, what is found there in no satisfying
measure or not at all.
  His writings, which have never been collected in a definitive
edition, are completely without order and often without thought.
His essays in prose are perhaps interesting on the first reading,
but, in truth, they are insipid attempts. The style is conceited,
in the worst sense of the word, strained, and banal, the subject
trivial and inflated, the kind of prose, in fact, in which the
bits of local news are written in a bad rural newspaper. It must
be remembered that Mangan wrote without a native literary
tradition, and wrote for a public that was interested only in the
events of the day, and insisted that the only task of the poet
was to illustrate these events. He was unable to revise his work,
except in unusual cases, but, aside from the so-called humorous
burlesques, and the occasional poems, which are obvious and
unpolished, the best part of his work makes a genuine appeal,
because it was conceived in the imagination, which he himself
calls, I think, the mother of things, whose dream we are, who
images us to herself, and to us, and images herself in us, that
power before whose breath the mind in creation becomes (to use
Shelley's phrase) a fading coal. Though in that which he has
written best the presence of alien emotions is often felt, the
presence of an imaginative personality reflecting the light of
imaginative beauty is felt even more vividly. East and West meet
in that personality (we now know how), images inter-weave there
like soft luminous scarves, the words shine and ringlike the
links in a coat of mail, and whether he sings of Ireland or of
Istamboul, his prayer is always the same, that peace may come
again to her who has lost it, the pearl of his soul, as he calls
her, Ameen.
  This figure which he adores recalls the spiritual yearnings and
the imaginary loves of the Middle Ages, and Mangan has placed his
lady in a world full of melody, of lights and perfumes, a world
that grows fatally to frame every face that the eyes of a poet
have gazed on with love. There is only one chivalrous idea, only
one male devotion, that lights up the faces of Vittoria Colonna,
Laura, and Beatrice, just as the bitter disillusion and the
self-disdain that end the chapter are one and the same. But the
world in which Mangan wishes his lady to dwell is different from
the marble temple built by Buonarotti, and from the peaceful
oriflamme of the Florentine theologian. It is a wild world, a
world of night in the orient. The mental activity that comes from
opium has scattered this world of magnificent and terrible
images, and all the orient that the poet recreated in his flaming
dream, which is the paradise of the opium-eater, pulsates in
these pages in Apocalyptic phrases and similes and landscapes. He
speaks of the moon that languishes in the midst of a riot of
purple colours, of the magic book of heaven red with fiery signs,
of the sea foaming over saffron sands, of the lonely cedar on the
peaks of the Balkans, of the barbaric hall shining with golden
crescents luxuriously permeated with the breath of roses from the
gulistan of the king.
  The most famous of Mangan's poems, those in which he sings
hymns of praise to his country's fallen glory under a veil of
mysticism, seem like a cloud that covers the horizon on a
summer's day, thin, impalpable, ready to disperse, and suffused
with little points of light. Sometimes the music seems to waken
from its lethargy and shouts with the ecstasy of combat. In the
final stanzas of the <Lament for the Princes of Tir-Ozeen and
Tirconnell>, in long lines full of tremendous force, he has put
all the energy of his race:

   And though frost glaze to-night the clear dew of his eyes,
   And white gauntlets glove his noble fair fine fingers o'er,
   A warm dress is to him that lightning-garb he ever wore,
   The lightning of the soul, not skies.

   Hugh marched forth to the fight--I grieved to see him so       
         depart;
   And lo! to-night he wanders frozen, rain-drenched, sad,        
         betrayed--
   But the memory of the lime-white mansions his right hand hath  
         laid
   In ashes warms the hero's heart.

  I do not know any other passage in English literature in which
the spirit of revenge has been joined to such heights of melody.
It is true that sometimes this heroic note becomes raucous, and a
troop of unmannerly passions echoes it derisively, but a poet
like Mangan who sums up in himself the soul of a country and an
era does not so much try to create for the entertainment of some
dilettante as to transmit to posterity the animating idea of his
life by the force of crude blows. On the other hand, it cannot be
denied that Mangan always kept his poetic soul spotless. Although
he wrote such a wonderful English style, he refused to
collaborate with the English newspapers or reviews; although he
was the spiritual focus of his time, he refused to prostitute
himself to the rabble or to make himself the loud-speaker of
politicians. He was one of those strange abnormal spirits who
believe that their artistic life should be nothing more than a
true and continual revelation of their spiritual life, who
believe that their inner life is so valuable that they have no
need of popular support, and thus abstain from proffering
confessions of faith, who believe, in sum, that the poet is
sufficient in himself, the heir and preserver of a secular
patrimony, who therefore has no urgent need to become a shouter,
or a preacher, or a perfumer.
  Now what is this central idea that Mangan wants to hand down to
posterity? All his poetry records injustice and tribulation, and
the aspiration of one who is moved to great deeds and rending
cries when he sees again in his mind the hour of his grief. This
is the theme of a large part of Irish poetry, but no other Irish
poems are full, as are those of Mangan, of misfortune nobly
suffered, of vastation of soul so irreparable. Naomi wished to
change her name to Mara, because she had known too well how
bitter is the existence of mortals, and is it not perhaps a
profound sense of sorrow and bitterness that explains in Mangan
all the names and titles that he gives himself, and the fury of
translation in which he tried to hide himself? For he did not
find in himself the faith of the solitary, or the faith that in
the Middle Ages sent the spires in the air like triumphant songs,
and he waits his hour, the hour that will end his sad days of
penance. Weaker than Leopardi, for he has not the courage of his
own despair, but forgets every ill and forgoes all scorn when
someone shows him a little kindness, he has, perhaps for this
reason, the memorial that he wished, a ['constant presence with
those that love me'.]

                     [Text missing]

  [Poetry, even when apparently most fantastic, is always a
revolt against artifice, a revolt, in] a certain sense, against
actuality. It speaks of that which seems unreal and fantastic to
those who have lost the simple intuitions which are the tests of
reality. Poetry considers many of the idols of the market place
unimportant -- the succession of the ages, the spirit of the age,
the mission of the race The poet's central effort is to free
himself from the unfortunate influence of these idols that
corrupt him from without and within, and certainly it would be
false to assert that Mangan has always made this effort. The
history of his country encloses him so straitly that even in his
hours of extreme individual passion he can barely reduce its
walls to ruins. He cries out in his life and in his mournful
verses against the injustice of despoilers, but almost never
laments a loss greater than that of buckles and banners. He
inherits the latest and worst part of a tradition upon which no
divine hand has ever traced a boundary, a tradition which is
loosened and divided against itself as it moves down the cycles.
And precisely because this tradition has become an obsession with
him, he has accepted it with all its regrets and failures and
would pass it on just as it is. The poet who hurls his lightning
against tyrants would establish upon the future an intimate and
crueller tyranny. The figure that he adores has the appearance of
an abject queen to whom, because of the bloody crimes that she
has committed and the no less bloody crimes committed against her
by the hands of others, madness has come and death is about to
come, but who does not wish to believe that she is about to die,
and remembers only the rumour of voices that besiege her sacred
garden and her lovely flowers that have become <pabulum aprorum>,
food for wild boars. Love of grief, despair, high-sounding
threats -- these are the great traditions of the race of James
Clarence Mangan, and in that impoverished figure, thin and
weakened, an hysterical nationalism receives its final
justification.
  In what niche of the temple of glory should we place his image?
If he has never won the sympathy of his own countrymen, how can
he win that of foreigners? Doesn't it seem probable that the
oblivion that he would almost have desired awaits him? Certainly
he did not find in himself the force to reveal to us triumphant
beauty, the splendour of truth that the ancients deify. He is a
romantic, a herald manque, the prototype of a nation manque, but
with all that, one who has expressed in a worthy form the sacred
indignation of his soul cannot have written his name in water. In
those vast courses of multiplex life that surround us, and in
that vast memory which is greater and more generous than ours,
probably no life, no moment of exaltation is ever lost; and all
those who have written in noble disdain have not written in vain,
although, weary and [desperate, they have never heard the silver
laughter of wisdom.]'

                           [Text ends]
