
43.   Il Piccolo della Sera,   May 16, 1912


The Shade of Parnell

  By passing the bill for parliamentary autonomy on its second
reading, the House of Commons has resolved the Irish question,
which, like the hen of Mugello, looks newborn, though it is a
hundred years old. The century which began with the transaction
of buying and selling the Dublin parliament is now closing with a
triangular pact between England, Ireland, and the United States.
It was graced with six Irish revolutionary movements which, by
the use of dynamite, rhetoric, the boycott, obstructionism, armed
revolt, and political assassination, have succeeded in keeping
awake the slow and senile conscience of English Liberalism .
  The present law was conceived, in the full maturity of time,
under the double pressure of the Nationalist party at Westminster
which has been jumbling up the workings of the British
legislative body for half a century, and the Irish party across
the Atlantic, which is blocking the greatly desired
Anglo-American alliance. Conceived and moulded with masterful
cunning and art, the law forms a worthy capstone to the tradition
handed down to posterity by that pluterperfect Liberal statesman,
William Gladstone. It suffices to say that, while it reduces the
strong phalanx of 103 Irish members actually represented at
Westminster to a band of 40 representatives, it pushes these into
the arms of the little Labour party; and from this incestuous
embrace there will probably be born a coalition which will
operate from the left, that is to say from the Liberal party's
point of operations in its campaign against Conservatism to the
extreme left.
  Into its tangle of financial qualifications, there is no chance
of penetrating. At any rate, the Irish government about to be
born will have to cover a deficit ably created by the British
treasury, either by manipulation of local and imperial taxes, or
by a reduction of its administrative expenses, or by an increase
in direct taxes, in any case provoking the disillusioned
hostility of the middle and lower classes. The Irish separatist
party would like to reject this Greek gift, which makes the
Chancellor of the Exchequer in Dublin a titular minister fully
responsible to the taxpayers and at the same time dependent on
the British cabinet, one who has the power to tax without being
able to control the collections of his department -- a
transmitter which cannot work unless the dynamo at London sends a
current of the necessary voltage.
  It doesn't matter -- there is an appearance of autonomy. At the
recent national assembly held at Dublin, the recriminations and
protests of the Nationalists who belong to the bitterly sceptical
school of John Mitchel did not disturb the popular rejoicing very
much. The representatives, grown old in the constitutional
struggle and weakened by so many years of deluded hopes, hailed
in their speeches the end of a long era of misunderstanding. A
young orator, Gladstone's nephew, invoked the name of his uncle
amid the frenzied acclamation of the crowd, and hailed the
prosperity of the new nation. Within two years at the most, with
or without the consent of the House of Lords, the doors of the
old Irish parliament will be reopened; and Ireland, released from
its century-old prison, will walk forth toward the palace like a
new bride, escorted by musicians and ritual bridal torches. A
grand-nephew of Gladstone, if there is one, will scatter flowers
beneath the feet of the sovereign; but there will be a ghost at
the banquet -- the shade of Charles Parnell.

              *     *      *       *

  His most recent critic has tried to minimize the greatness of
this strange spirit by pointing out the different sources of his
agile parliamentary tactics. But even if we grant the historical
critic that obstructionism was invented by Biggar and Ronayne,
that the doctrine of the independence of the Irish party was
launched by Gavan Duffy, that the Agrarian League was the
creation of Michael Davitt, these concessions only make more
conspicuous the extraordinary personality of a leader who,
without forensic gifts or any original political talent, forced
the greatest English politicians to carry out his orders; and,
like another Moses, led a turbulent and unstable people from the
house of shame to the verge of the Promised Land.
  The influence exerted on the Irish people by Parnell defies
critical analysis. He had a speech defect and a delicate physique
he was ignorant of the history of his native land; his short and
fragmentary speeches lacked eloquence, poetry, and humour; his
cold and formal bearing separated him from his own colleagues; he
was a Protestant, a descendant of an aristocratic family, and, as
a crowning disgrace, he spoke with a distinct English accent. He
would often come to meetings an hour or an hour and a half late
without apologizing. He would neglect his correspondence for
weeks on end. The applause and anger of the crowd, the abuse and
praise of the press, the denunciations and defence of the British
ministers never disturbed the melancholy serenity of his
character. It is even said that he did not know by sight many of
those who sat with him on the Irish benches. When the Irish
people presented him with a national gratuity of 40,000 pounds
sterling in 1887, he put the cheque into his billfold, and in the
speech which he delivered to the immense gathering made not the
slightest reference to the gift which he had received.
  When he was shown the copy of <The Times> containing the famous
autograph letter which would have proved his implication in the
barbarous assassination in Phoenix Park, he put his finger on one
letter in the handwriting and said simply, 'I have not made an
's' that way since '78.' Later, when the inquiries of the Royal
Commission revealed the conspiracy which had been formed against
him and the perjurer and forger Pigott blew out his brains in a
Madrid hotel, the House of Commons, without regard to party,
greeted Parnell's entrance with an ovation that remains without
precedent in the annals of the British Parliament. Is it
necessary to say that Parnell made no response to the ovation
with a smile or a bow or a gesture, but merely passed to his
place beyond the aisle and sat down? Gladstone was probably
thinking of this incident when he called the Irish leader an
intellectual phenomenon.
  Nothing more unusual can be imagined than the appearance of
this intellectual phenomenon in the midst of the moral
suffocation of Westminster. Now, looking back at the scene of the
drama and hearing again the speeches that shook the minds of his
listeners, it is useless to deny that all the eloquence and all
those triumphs of strategy begin to smell stale. But time is
kinder to the 'uncrowned king' than to the jester and the
phrase-maker. The light of his sovereign bearing, mild and proud,
silent and disconsolate, makes Disraeli look like a diplomatic
opportunist who dines when he can at rich men's houses, and
Gladstone like an imposing major domo who has gone to night
school. How lightly Disraeli's wit and Gladstone's culture weigh
in the balance today. Today how flimsy seem the studied gibes,
the greasy locks, and the stupid novels of Disraeli; and the
high-sounding periods, the Homeric studies, the speeches on
Artemis and on marmalade of Gladstone.
  Although Parnell's strategy was to make use of any English
party, Liberal or Conservative, at his pleasure, a nexus of
circumstances involved him in the Liberal movement. Gladstonian
liberalism was an inconstant algebraic symbol whose coefficient
was the movement's political pressure and whose index was his
personal profit. While he temporized in internal politics,
contradicting and justifying himself in turn, he always
maintained (as much as he was capable of it) a sincere admiration
for liberty in the house of others. It is necessary to keep in
mind this elastic quality of Gladstone's liberalism in order to
understand the nature and magnitude of Parnell's task.
  To put it in few words, Gladstone was a self-seeking
politician. He raged at the restless iniquity of O'Connell in
1835, but he was the English legislator who proclaimed the moral
and economic necessity for Irish autonomy. He thundered against
the admission of Jews to public office, but he was the minister
who, for the first time in English history, raised a Jew to the
peerage. He spoke fiercely against the Boers who rebelled in
1881, but after the defeat of Majuba he concluded a treaty with
Transvaal which the English themselves called a cowardly
surrender. In his first parliamentary speech he warmly defended
against Earl Grey's accusation of cruelty his own father, a rich
slave owner in Demerara who had made two million francs from the
sale of human flesh, while in his last letter to another
'childhood friend', the Duke of Westminster, he invoked all the
lightning available on the head of the great assassin of
Constantinople.
  Parnell, convinced that such liberalism would yield only to
force, united behind him every element of Irish life and began to
march, treading on the verge of insurrection. Just six years
after his entrance into Westminster he held in his hands the fate
of the government. He was imprisoned, but in his cell at
Kilmainham he concluded a pact with the ministers who had
imprisoned him. When the attempt at blackmail failed with
Pigott's confession and suicide, the Liberal government offered
him a portfolio. Parnell not only refused it, he ordered all his
followers as well to refuse ministerial duties, and forbade the
municipalities and public corporations in Ireland to receive
officially any member of the British royal house until the
English government should restore autonomy to Ireland. The
Liberals had to accept these humiliating conditions, and in 1886
Gladstone read the first Home Rule Bill at Westminster.
  Parnell's fall came in the midst of these events like lightning
from a clear sky. He fell hopelessly in love with a married
woman, and when her husband, Captain O'Shea, asked for a divorce,
the ministers Gladstone and Morley openly refused to legislate in
favour of Ireland if the sinner remained as head of the
Nationalist Party. Parnell did not appear at the hearings to
defend himself. He denied the right of a minister to exercise a
veto over the political affairs of Ireland, and refused to
resign.
  He was deposed in obedience to Gladstone's orders. Of his 8
representatives only 8 remained faithful to him. The high and low
clergy entered the lists to finish him off. The Irish press
emptied on him and the woman he loved the vials of their envy.
The citizens of Castlecomer threw quicklime in his eyes. He went
from county to county, from city to city, 'like a hunted deer', a
spectral figure with the signs of death on his forehead. Within a
year he died of a broken heart at the age of 45.
  The ghost of the 'uncrowned king' will weigh on the hearts of
those who remember him when the new Ireland in the near future
enters into the palace 'fimbriis aureis circumamicta
varietatibus' but it will not be a vindictive ghost. The
melancholy which invaded his mind was perhaps the profound
conviction that, in his hour of need, one of the disciples who
dipped his hand in the same bowl with him would betray him. That
he fought to the very end with this desolate certainty in mind is
his greatest claim to nobility.
  In his final desperate appeal to his countrymen, he begged them
not to throw him as a sop to the English wolves howling around
them. It redounds to their honour that they did not fail this
appeal. They did not throw him to the English wolves; they tore
him to pieces themselves.
                                  JAMES JOYCE
