
7.   Essay   1901


The Day of the Rabblement

  No man, said the Nolan, can be a lover of the true or the good
unless he abhors the multitude; and the artist, though he may
employ the crowd, is very careful to isolate himself. This
radical principle of artistic economy applies specially to a time
of crisis, and today when the highest form of art has been just
preserved by desperate sacrifices, it is strange to see the
artist making terms with the rabblement. The Irish Literary
Theatre is the latest movement of protest against the sterility
and falsehood of the modern stage. Half a century ago the note of
protest was uttered in Norway, and since then in several
countries long and disheartening battles have been fought against
the hosts of prejudice and misinterpretation and ridicule. What
triumph there has been here and there is due to stubborn
conviction, and every movement that has set out heroically has
achieved a little. The Irish Literary Theatre gave out that it
was the champion of progress, and proclaimed war against
commercialism and vulgarity. It had partly made good its word and
was expelling the old devil, when after the first encounter it
surrendered to the popular will. Now, your popular devil is more
dangerous than your vulgar devil. Bulk and lungs count for
something, and he can gild his speech aptly. He has prevailed
once more, and the Irish Literary Theatre must now be considered
the property of the rabblement of the most belated race in
Europe.
  It will be interesting to examine here. The official organ of
the movement spoke of producing European masterpieces, but the
matter went no further. Such a project was absolutely necessary.
The censorship is powerless in Dublin, and the directors could
have produced <Ghosts> or <The Dominion of Darkness> if they
chose. Nothing can be done until the forces that dictate public
judgement are calmly confronted. But, of course, the directors
are shy of presenting Ibsen, Tolstoy or Hauptmann, where even
Countess Cathleen is pronounced vicious and damnable. Even for a
technical reason this project was necessary. A nation which never
advanced so far as a miracle-play affords no literary model to
the artist, and he must look abroad. Earnest dramatists of the
second rank, Sudermann, Bjornson, and Giacosa, can write very
much better plays than the Irish Literary Theatre has staged.
But, of course, the directors would not like to present such
improper writers to the uncultivated, much less to the
cultivated, rabblement. Accordingly, the rabblement, placid and
intensely moral, is enthroned in boxes and galleries amid a hum
of approval -- <la bestia Trionfante> -- and those who think that
Echegaray is 'morbid', and titter coyly when Melisande lets down
her hair, are not sure but they are the trustees of every
intellectual and poetic treasure. 
  Meanwhile, what of the artists? It is equally unsafe at present
to say of Mr. Yeats that he has or has not genius. In aim and
form <The Wind among the Reeds> is poetry of the highest order,
and <The Adoration of the Magi> (a story which one of the great
Russians might have written) shows what Mr. Yeats can do when he
breaks with the half-gods. But an aesthete has a floating will,
and Mr. Yeats's treacherous instinct of adaptability must be
blamed for his recent association with a platform from which even
self-respect should have urged him to refrain. Mr. Martyn and Mr.
Moore are not writers of much originality. Mr. Martyn, disabled
as he is by an incorrigible style, has none of the fierce,
hysterical power of Strindberg, whom he suggests at times; and
with him one is conscious of a lack of breadth and distinction
which outweighs the nobility of certain passages. Mr. Moore,
however, has wonderful mimetic ability, and some years ago his
books might have entitled him to the place of honour among
English novelists. But though <Vain Fortune> (perhaps one should
add some of <Esther Waters>) is fine, original work, Mr. Moore is
really struggling in the backwash of that tide which has advanced
from Flaubert through Jakobsen to D'Annunzio: for two entire eras
lie between <Madame Bovary> and <Il Fuoco>. It is plain from
Celibates and the later novels that Mr. Moore is beginning to
draw upon his literary account, and the quest of a new impulse
may explain his recent startling conversion. Converts are in the
movement now, and Mr. Moore and his island have been fitly
admired. But however frankly Mr. Moore may misquote Pater and
Turgenieff to defend himself, his new impulse has no kind of
relation to the future of art.
  In such circumstances it has become imperative to define the
position. If an artist courts the favour of the multitude he
cannot escape the contagion of its fetichism and deliberate
self-deception, and if he joins in a popular movement he does so
at his own risk. Therefore, the Irish Literary Theatre by its
surrender to the trolls has cut itself adrift from the line of
advancement. Until he has freed himself from the mean influences
about him -- sodden enthusiasm and clever insinuation and every
flattering influence of vanity and low ambition -- no man is an
artist at all. But his true servitude is that he inherits a will
broken by doubt and a soul that yields up all its hate to a
caress; and the most seeming-independent are those who are the
first to reassume their bonds. But Truth deals largely with us.
Elsewhere there are men who are worthy to carry on the tradition
of the old master who is dying in Christiania. He has already
found his successor in the writer of <Michael Kramer>, and the
third minister will not be wanting when his hour comes. Even now
that hour may be standing by the door.
                                     JAMES A. JOYCE
 October 15th. 1901
